<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Santa Caterina of Siena</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="santa-caterina-of-siena" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Santa Caterina of Siena</h2>
			<p>At <span lang="it" xml:lang="it">Santa</span> Caterina’s house in Siena, on a day towards the end of April, in the week when her fête is being celebrated, people come to the old house in the Street of the Dyers, to the house with the pretty loggia and with the many small chambers, which have now been converted into chapels and sanctuaries, bringing bouquets of white lilies; and the rooms are fragrant with incense and violets.</p>
			<p>Walking through these rooms, one cannot help thinking that it is just as if she were dead yesterday, as if all those who go in and out of her home to-day had seen and known her.</p>
			<p>But, on the other hand, no one could really think that she had died recently, for then there would be more grief and tears, and not only a quiet sense of loss. It is more as if a beloved daughter had been recently married, and had left the parental home.</p>
			<p>Look only at the nearest houses. The old walls are still decorated as if for a fête. And in her own home garlands of flowers are still hanging beneath the portico and loggia, green leaves are strewn on the staircase and the doorstep, and large bouquets of flowers fill the rooms with their scent.</p>
			<p>She cannot possibly have been dead five hundred years. It looks much more as if she had celebrated her marriage, and had gone away to a country from which she would not return for many years, perhaps never. Are not the houses decorated with nothing but red table-cloths, red trappings, and red silken banners, and are there not stuck red-paper roses in the dark garlands of oak-leaves? and the hangings over the doors and the windows, are they not red with golden fringes? Can one imagine anything more cheerful?</p>
			<p>And notice how the old women go about in the house and examine her small belongings. It is as if they had seen her wear that very veil and that very shirt of hair. They inspect the room in which she lived, and point to the bedstead and the packets of letters, and they tell how at first she could not at all learn to write, but that it came to her all at once without her having learnt it. And only look at her writing⁠—how good and distinct! And then they point to the little bottle she used to carry at her belt, so as always to have a little medicine at hand in case she met a sick person, and they utter a blessing over the old lantern she held in her hand when she went and visited the sick in the long weary nights. It is just as if they would say: “Dear me⁠—dear me! that our little Caterina Benincasa should be gone, that she will never come any more and look after us old people!” And they kiss her picture, and take a flower from the bouquets to keep as a remembrance.</p>
			<p>It looks as if those who were left in the home had long ago prepared themselves for the separation, and tried to do everything possible to keep alive the memory of the one who had gone away. See, there they have painted her on the wall; there is the whole of her little history represented in every detail. There she is when she cut off her beautiful long hair so that no man could ever fall in love with her, for she would never marry. Oh dear⁠—oh dear! how much ridicule and scoffing she had suffered on that account! It is dreadful to think how her mother tormented her and treated her like a servant, and made her sleep on the stone floor in the hall, and would not give her any food, all because of her being so obstinate about that hair. But what was she to do when they continually tried to get her married⁠—she who would have no other bridegroom than Christ? And there she is when she was kneeling in prayer, and her father coming into the room without her knowing it saw a beautiful white dove hovering over her head whilst she was praying. And there she is on that Christmas Eve when she had gone secretly to the Madonna’s altar in order the more fully to rejoice over the birth of the Son of God, and the beautiful Madonna leaned out of her picture and handed the Child to her that she might be allowed to hold it for a moment in her arms. Oh, what a joy it had been for her!</p>
			<p>Oh dear, no; it is not at all necessary to say that our little Caterina Benincasa is dead. One need only say that she has gone away with the Bridegroom.</p>
			<p>In her home one will never forget her pious ways and doings. All the poor of Siena come and knock at her door because they know that it is the marriage-day of the little virgin, and large piles of bread lie in readiness for them as if she were still there. They have their pockets and baskets filled; had she herself been there, she could not have sent them away more heavily laden. She who had gone away had left so great a want that one almost wonders the Bridegroom had the heart to take her away with him.</p>
			<p>In the small chapels which have been arranged in every corner of the house they read Mass the whole day, and they invoke the bride and sing hymns in her praise.</p>
			<p>“Holy Caterina,” they say, “on this the day of thy death, which is thine heavenly wedding-day, pray for us!”</p>
			<p>“Holy Caterina, thou who hadst no other love but Christ, thou who in life wert His affianced bride, and who in death wast received by Him in Paradise, pray for us!”</p>
			<p>“Holy Caterina, thou radiant heavenly bride, thou most blessed of virgins, thou whom the mother of God exalted to her Son’s side, thou who on this day wast carried by angels to the kingdom of glory, pray for us!”</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>It is strange how one comes to love her, how the home and the pictures and the love of the old and the poor seem to make her living, and one begins to wonder how she really was, whether she was only a saint, only a heavenly bride, and if it is true that she was unable to love any other than Christ. And then comes to one’s mind an old story which warmed one’s heart long ago, at first quite vague and without shape, but whilst one is sitting there under the loggia in the festively decorated home and watching the poor wander away with their full baskets, and hearing the subdued murmur from the chapels, the story becomes more and more distinct, and suddenly it is vivid and clear.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>Nicola Tungo was a young nobleman of Perugia, who often came to Siena on account of the races. He soon found out how badly Siena was governed, and often said, both at the festive gatherings of the great and when he sat drinking in the inns, that Siena ought to rise against the Signoria and procure other rulers.</p>
			<p>The Signoria had not been in power for more than half a year; they did not feel particularly firm in their office, and did not like the Perugian stirring up the people. In order promptly to put a stop to it, they had him imprisoned, and after a short trial he was sentenced to death. He was placed in a cell in the Palazzo Publico whilst preparations were being made for his execution, which was to take place the next morning in the Market Place.</p>
			<p>At first he was strangely affected. To-morrow he would no more wear his green velvet doublet and his beautiful sword; he would no more walk down the street in his cap with the ostrich-feather and attract the glances of the young maidens, and he had a feeling of painful disappointment that he would never ride the new horse which he bought yesterday, and which he had only tried once.</p>
			<p>Suddenly he called the gaoler, and asked him to go to the gentlemen of the Signoria and tell them that he could not possibly allow himself to be killed; he had no time. He had far too much to do. Life could not do without him. His father was old, and he was the only son; it was through his descendants that the family should be continued. It was he who should give away his sisters in marriage, he who should build the new palace, he who should plant the new vineyard.</p>
			<p>He was a strong young man; he did not know what sickness was, had nothing but life in his veins. His hair was dark and his cheeks red. He could not realize that he should die.</p>
			<p>When he thought of their wanting to take him away from pleasure and dancing, and the carnival, and from the races next Sunday, and from the serenade he was going to sing to the beautiful <span class="correction" title="Transcriber's Note: Original has Guilietta">Giulietta</span> Lombardi, he became furiously angry, and his wrath was roused against the councillors as though they were thieves and robbers. The scoundrels⁠—the scoundrels that would take his life from him!</p>
			<p>But as time went on his longings grew deeper; he longed for air and water and heaven and earth. He felt he would not mind being a beggar by the wayside; he would gladly suffer sickness and hunger and cold if only he were allowed to live.</p>
			<p>He wished that everything might die with him, that nothing would be left when he was gone; that would have been a great consolation.</p>
			<p>But that people should go to the Market Place and buy and sell, and that the women would fetch water from the well, and that the children would run in the streets the next day and all days, and that he would not be there to see, that he could not bear. He envied not only those who could live in luxury and pleasure, and were happy; he envied quite as much the most miserable cripple. What he wanted was life, solely life.</p>
			<p>Then the priests and the monks came to see him. It made him almost happy, for now he had someone upon whom he could wreak his anger. He first allowed them to talk a little. It amused him to hear what they had to say to a man so deeply wronged as he was, but when they said that he ought to rejoice that he was permitted to leave this life and gain the bliss of heaven in the fulness of his youth, then he started up and poured forth his wrath upon them. He scoffed at God and the joys of heaven⁠—he did not want them. He would have life, and the world, and its pomps and vanities. He regretted every day in which he had not revelled in earthly enjoyment; he regretted every temptation he had resisted. God need not trouble Himself in the least about him; he felt no longing for His heaven.</p>
			<p>The priests continued to speak; he seized one of them by the throat, and would have killed him had not the gaoler thrown himself between them. They now bound and gagged him, and then preached to him; but as soon as he was allowed to speak he raged as before. They talked to him for many hours, but they saw that it was of no avail.</p>
			<p>When they could think of nothing else to do, one of them suggested they should send for the young Caterina Benincasa, who had shown great power in subduing defiant spirits. When the Perugian heard the name he suddenly ceased his abuse. In truth, it pleased him. It was something quite different, having to do with a young, beautiful maiden.</p>
			<p>“By all means send for the maiden,” he said.</p>
			<p>He knew that she was the young daughter of a dyer, and that she went about alone and preached in the lanes and streets of the town. Some thought she was mad, others said that she had visions. For him she might, anyhow, be better company than these dirty monks, who made him completely beside himself.</p>
			<p>The monks then went their way, and he was alone. Shortly afterwards the door was again opened, but if she for whom they had sent had really entered the cell, she must have walked with very light footsteps, for he heard nothing. He lay on the floor just as he had thrown himself down in his great anger; now he was too tired to raise himself, or make a movement, or even to look up. His arms were tied together with ropes, which cut deep into his flesh.</p>
			<p>He now felt that someone began to loosen his bands; a warm hand touched his arm, and he looked up. Beside him lay a little figure in the white dress of the Dominicans, with head and neck so shrouded in a white veil that there was not more of her face to be seen than of that of a knight in helmet and closed visor.</p>
			<p>She did not look so meek by any means; she was evidently a little annoyed. He heard her murmur something about the gaolers who had tightened the bands. It did not appear as if she had come for any other purpose than these knots. She was only taken up with loosening them so that they did not hurt. At last she had to bite in them, and then she succeeded. She untied the cord with a light hand, and then took the little bottle which was suspended from her belt and poured a few drops upon the chafed skin.</p>
			<p>He lay the whole time and looked at her, but she did not meet his glance; it appeared as if she could think of nothing else but what she had between her hands. It was as if nothing were further from her thoughts than that she was there to prepare him for death. He felt so exhausted after his passion, and at the same time so quieted by her presence, that he only said:</p>
			<p>“I think I will sleep.”</p>
			<p>“It is a great shame that they have not given you any straw,” she said.</p>
			<p>For a moment she looked about undecided. Then she sat down upon the floor, and placed his head in her lap.</p>
			<p>“Are you better now?” she said.</p>
			<p>Never in his whole life had he felt such a rest. Yet sleep he could not, but he lay and looked up in her face, which was like wax, and transparent. Such eyes he had never seen before. They were always looking far, far away, gazing into another world, whilst she sat quite motionless, so as not to disturb his sleep.</p>
			<p>“You are not sleeping, Nicola Tungo,” she said, and looked uneasy.</p>
			<p>“I cannot sleep,” he replied, “because I am wondering who you can be.”</p>
			<p>“I am a daughter of Luca Benincasa the dyer, and his wife Lapa,” she said.</p>
			<p>“I know that,” he said, “and I also know that you go about and preach in the streets. And I know that you have attired yourself in the dress of a nun, and have taken the vows of chastity. But yet I don’t know who you are.”</p>
			<p>She turned her head away a little. Then she said, whispering like one who confesses her first love:</p>
			<p>“I am the Bride of Christ.”</p>
			<p>He did not laugh. On the contrary, he felt quite a pang in his heart, as from jealousy.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Christ!” he said, as if she had thrown herself away.</p>
			<p>She heard that his tone was contemptuous, but she thought he meant that she had spoken too presumptuously.</p>
			<p>“I do not understand it myself,” she said, “but so it is.”</p>
			<p>“Is it an imagination or a dream?” he said.</p>
			<p>She turned her face towards him. The blood rose red behind the transparent skin. He saw suddenly that she was fair as a flower, and she became dear to him. He moved his lips as if to speak, but at first no sound came.</p>
			<p>“How can you expect me to believe that?” he said defiantly.</p>
			<p>“Is it not enough for you that I am here in the prison with you?” she asked, raising her voice. “Is it any pleasure for a young girl like me to go to you and other evil-doers in their gloomy dungeons? Is it usual for a woman to stand and preach at the street corners as I do, and to be held in derision? Do I not require sleep as other people? And yet I must rise every night and go to the sick in the hospitals. Am I not timid as other women? And yet I must go to the high-born gentlemen at their castles and reason with them, I must go to the plague-smitten, I must see all vice and sin. When have you seen another maiden do all this? But I am obliged to do it.”</p>
			<p>“Poor thing!” he said, and stroked her hand gently⁠—“poor thing!”</p>
			<p>“For I am not braver, or wiser, or stronger than others,” she said. “It is just as hard for me as for other maidens. You can see that. I have come here to speak with you about your soul, but I do not at all know what I shall say to you.”</p>
			<p>It was strange how reluctantly he would allow himself to be convinced.</p>
			<p>“You may be mistaken all the same,” he said. “How do you know that you can call yourself the Bride of Christ?”</p>
			<p>Her voice trembled, and it was as if she should tear out her heart when she replied:</p>
			<p>“It began when I was quite young; I was not more than six years old. It was one evening when I was walking with my brother in the meadow below the church of the Dominicans, and just as I looked up at the church I saw Christ sitting on a throne, surrounded by all His power and glory. He was attired in shining white garments like the Holy Father in Rome. His head was surrounded by all the splendour of Paradise, and around Him stood Pietro Paolo and the Evangelist Giovanni. And whilst I gazed upon Him my heart was filled with such a love and holy joy that I could hardly bear it. He lifted His hand and blessed me, and I sank down on the meadow, and was so overcome with bliss, that my brother had to take me in his arms and shake me. And ever since that time, Nicola Tungo, I have loved Jesus as a bridegroom.”</p>
			<p>He again objected.</p>
			<p>“You were a child then. You had fallen asleep in the meadow and were dreaming.”</p>
			<p>“Dreaming?” she repeated. “Have I been dreaming all the time I have seen Him? Was it a dream when He came to me in the church in the likeness of a beggar and asked for alms? Then I was wide awake, at any rate. And do you think that for the sake of a dream only I could have borne all the worries I have had to bear as a young girl because I would not marry?”</p>
			<p>Nicola went on contradicting her because he could not bear the thought that her heart was filled with love to another.</p>
			<p>“But even if you do love Christ, maiden, how do you know that He loves you?”</p>
			<p>She smiled her very happiest smile and clapped her hands like a child.</p>
			<p>“Now you shall hear,” she said. “Now I will tell you the most important of all. It was the last night before Lent. It was after my parents and I had been reconciled, and I had obtained their permission to take the vow of chastity and wear the dress of a nun, although I continued to live in their house; and it was night, as I told you, the last night of the carnival, when everybody turns night into day. There were fêtes in every street. On the walls of the big palaces hung balconies like cages, completely covered with silken hangings and banners, and filled with noble ladies. I saw all their beauty by the light of the red torches in their bronze-holders, the one row over the other quite up to the roof; and in the gaily decorated streets there was a train of carriages, with golden towers, and all the gods and goddesses, and all the virtues and beauties went by in a long procession. And everywhere there was such a play of masks and so much merriment that I am sure that you, sir, have never taken part in anything more gay. And I took refuge in my chamber, but still I heard laughter from the street, and never before have I heard people laugh like that; it was so clear and bell-like that everyone was obliged to join in it. And they sang songs which, I suppose, were wicked, but they sounded so innocent, and caused such pleasure, that one’s heart trembled. Then, in the middle of my prayers, I suddenly began to wonder why I was not out amongst them, and the thought fascinated and tempted me, as if I were dragged along by a runaway horse; but never before have I prayed so intensely to Christ to show me what was His will with me. Suddenly all the noise ceased, a great and wonderful silence surrounded me, and I saw a great meadow, where the Mother of God sat amongst the flowers, and on her lap lay the Child Jesus, playing with lilies. But I hurried thither in great joy, and knelt before the Child, and was at the same moment filled with peace and quietness, and then the Holy Child placed a ring on my finger, and said to me, ‘Know, Caterina, that to-day I celebrate My betrothal with thee, and bind thee to Me by the strongest faith.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Caterina!”</p>
			<p>The young Perugian had turned himself on the floor, so that he could bury his face in her lap. It was as if he could not bear to see how radiant she was whilst she was speaking, and now her eyes became bright as stars. A shadow of pain passed over him. For whilst she spoke a great sorrow had sprung up in his heart. This little maiden, this little white maiden, he could never win. Her love belonged to another; it could never be his. It was of no use even to tell her that he loved her; but he suffered; his whole being groaned in love’s agony. How could he bear to live without her? It almost became a consolation to remember that he was sentenced to death. It was not necessary for him to live and do without her.</p>
			<p>Then the little woman beside him sighed deeply, and came back from the joys of heaven in order to think of poor human beings.</p>
			<p>“I forgot to speak to you about your soul,” she said.</p>
			<p>Then, he thought: “This burden, at any rate, I can lighten for her.”</p>
			<p>“Sister Caterina,” he said, “I do not know how it is, but heavenly consolation has come to me. In God’s name I will prepare for death. Now you may send for the priests and monks; now I will confess to them. But one thing you must promise me before you go: you must come to me to-morrow, when I shall die, and hold my head between your hands as you are doing now.”</p>
			<p>When he said this she burst into tears, from a great feeling of relief, and an unspeakable joy filled her.</p>
			<p>“How happy you must be, Nicola Tungo!” she said. “You will be in Paradise before I am;” and she stroked his face gently.</p>
			<p>He said again:</p>
			<p>“You will come to me to-morrow in the Market Place? Perhaps I shall otherwise be afraid; perhaps I cannot otherwise die with steadfastness. But when you are there I shall feel nothing but joy, and all fear will leave me.”</p>
			<p>“You do not seem to me any more as a poor mortal,” she said, “but as a dweller of Paradise. You appear to me radiant with life, surrounded by incense. Bliss comes to me from you, who shall so soon meet my beloved Bridegroom. Be assured I shall come.”</p>
			<p>She then led him to confession and the Communion. He felt the whole time as if he were asleep. All the fear of death and the longing for life had passed away from him. He longed for the morning, when he should see her again; he thought only of her, and of the love with which she had inspired him. Death seemed to him now but a slight thing compared with the pain of the thought that she would never love him.</p>
			<p>The young maiden did not sleep much during the night, and early in the morning she went to the place of execution, to be there when he came. She invoked Jesu, Mother, Marie, and the Holy Caterina of Egypt, virgin and martyr, incessantly with prayers to save his soul. Incessantly she repeated: “I will that he shall be saved⁠—I will, I will.” But she was afraid that her prayers were unavailing, for she did not feel any longer that ecstasy which had filled her the evening before; she only felt an infinite pity for him who should die. She was quite overcome with grief and sorrow.</p>
			<p>Little by little the Market Place filled with people. The soldiers marched up, the executioner arrived, and much noise and talking went on around her; but she saw and heard nothing. She felt as if she were quite alone.</p>
			<p>When Nicola Tungo arrived, it was just the same with him. He had no thought for all the others, but saw only her. When he saw at the first glance that she was entirely overcome with sorrow, his face beamed, and he felt almost happy. He called loudly to her:</p>
			<p>“You have not slept much this night, maiden?”</p>
			<p>“No,” she said; “I have watched in prayer for you; but now I am in despair, for my prayers have no power.”</p>
			<p>He knelt down before the block, and she knelt so that she could hold his head in her hands.</p>
			<p>“Now I am going to your Bridegroom, Caterina.”</p>
			<p>She sobbed more and more.</p>
			<p>“I can comfort you so badly,” she said.</p>
			<p>He looked at her with a strange smile.</p>
			<p>“Your tears are my best comfort.”</p>
			<p>The executioner stood with his sword drawn, but she bade him with a movement stand on one side, for she would speak a few words with the doomed man.</p>
			<p>“Before you came,” she said, “I laid my head down on the block to try if I could bear it; and then I felt that I was still afraid of death, that I do not love Jesus enough to be willing to die in this hour; and I do not wish you to die either, and my prayers have no power.”</p>
			<p>When he heard this he thought: “Had I lived I should have won her”; and he was glad he should die before he had succeeded in drawing the radiant heavenly bride down to earth. But when he had laid his head in her hands, a great consolation came to them both.</p>
			<p>“Nicola Tungo,” she said, “I see heaven open. The angels descend to receive your soul.”</p>
			<p>A wondering smile passed over his face. Could what he had done for her sake make him worthy of heaven? He lifted his eyes to see what she saw; the same moment the sword fell.</p>
			<p>But Caterina saw the angels descend lower and lower, saw them lift his soul, saw them carry it to heaven.</p>
			<hr class="tb"/>
			<p>All at once it seemed so natural that Caterina Benincasa has lived all these five hundred years. How could one forget that gentle little maiden, that great loving heart? Again and again they must sing in her praise, as they are now singing in the small chapels:</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Pia Mater et humilis,</span><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Naturæ memor fragilis,</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">In hujus vitæ fluctibus</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Nos rege tuis precibus.</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Quem vidi, quem amavi,</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">In quem credidi, quem dilexi,</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i4">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Ora pro nobis.</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Ut digni efficiamur promessionibus Christi!</span>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0"><span lang="la" xml:lang="la">Santa Caterina, ora pro nobis!</span>”<a id="FNanchor_B" name="FNanchor_B"/><a class="fnanchor" href="#Footnote_B">[B]</a><br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_B" name="Footnote_B"/><a href="#FNanchor_B"><span class="label">[B]</span></a> Pious and gentle Mother, thou who knowest our weak nature, guide us by thy prayers through this life’s vicissitudes. Thou, whom I saw and loved, in whom I believed and whom I adored, pray for us, that we may be worthy of Christ’s promises. Holy Caterina, pray for us!</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
