<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Story of a Country House</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-story-of-a-country-house" epub:type="se:novella">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Story of a Country House</h2>
			<section id="the-story-of-a-country-house-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>It was a beautiful autumn day towards the end of the thirties. There was in Upsala at that time a high, yellow, two-storied house, which stood quite alone in a little meadow on the outskirts of the town. It was a rather desolate and dismal-looking house, but was rendered less so by the Virginia-creepers which grew there in profusion, and which had crept so high up the yellow wall on the sunny side of the house that they completely surrounded the three windows on the upper story.</p>
				<p>At one of these windows a student was sitting, drinking his morning coffee. He was a tall, handsome fellow, of distinguished appearance. His hair was brushed back from his forehead; it curled prettily, and a lock was continually falling into his eyes. He wore a loose, comfortable suit, but looked rather smart all the same.</p>
				<p>His room was well furnished. There was a good sofa and comfortable chairs, a large writing-table, a capital bookcase, but hardly any books.</p>
				<p>Before he had finished his coffee another student entered the room. The newcomer was a totally different-looking man. He was a short, broad-shouldered fellow, squarely built and strong, ugly, with a large head, thin hair, and coarse complexion.</p>
				<p>“Hede,” he said, “I have come to have a serious talk with you.”</p>
				<p>“Has anything unpleasant happened to you?”</p>
				<p>“Oh no, not to me,” the other answered; “it is really you it concerns.” He sat silent for a while, and looked down. “It is so awfully unpleasant having to tell you.”</p>
				<p>“Leave it alone, then,” suggested Hede.</p>
				<p>He felt inclined to laugh at his friend’s solemnity.</p>
				<p>“I can’t leave it alone any longer,” said his visitor. “I ought to have spoken to you long ago, but it is hardly my place. You understand? I can’t help thinking you will say to yourself: ‘There’s Gustaf Alin, son of one of our cottagers, thinks himself such a great man now that he can order me about.’ ”</p>
				<p>“My dear fellow,” Hede said, “don’t imagine I think anything of the kind. My father’s father was a peasant’s son.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but no one thinks of that now,” Alin answered. He sat there, looking awkward and stupid, resuming every moment more and more of his peasant manners, as if that could help him out of his difficulty. “When I think of the difference there is between your family and mine, I feel as if I ought to keep quiet; but when I remember that it was your father who, by his help in days gone by, enabled me to study, then I feel that I must speak.”</p>
				<p>Hede looked at him with a pleasant smile.</p>
				<p>“You had better speak out and have done with it,” he said.</p>
				<p>“The thing is,” Alin said, “I have heard people say that you don’t do any work. They say you have hardly opened a book during the four terms you have been at the University. They say you don’t do anything but play on the violin the whole day; and that I can quite believe, for you never wanted to do anything else when you were at school in Falu, although there you were obliged to work.”</p>
				<p>Hede straightened himself a little in his chair. Alin grew more and more uncomfortable, but he continued with stubborn resolution:</p>
				<p>“I suppose you think that anyone owning an estate like Munkhyttan ought to be able to do as he likes⁠—work if he likes, or leave it alone. If he takes his exam, good; if he does not take his exam, what does it matter? for in any case you will never be anything but a landed proprietor and iron-master. You will live at Munkhyttan all your life. I understand quite well that is what you must think.”</p>
				<p>Hede was silent, and Alin seemed to see him surrounded by the same wall of distinction which in Alin’s eyes had always surrounded his father, the Squire, and his mother.</p>
				<p>“But, you see, Munkhyttan is no longer what it used to be when there was iron in the mine,” he continued cautiously. “The Squire knew that very well, and that was why it was arranged before his death that you should study. Your poor mother knows it, too, and the whole parish knows it. The only one who does not know anything is you, Hede.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t you think I know,” Hede said a little irritably, “that the iron-mine cannot be worked any longer?”</p>
				<p>“Oh yes,” Alin said, “I dare say you know that much, but you don’t know that it is all up with the property. Think the matter over, and you will understand that one cannot live from farming alone at Vesterdalarne. I cannot understand why your mother has kept it a secret from you. But, of course, she has the sole control of the estate, so she need not ask your advice about anything. Everybody at home knows that she is hard up. They say she drives about borrowing money. I suppose she did not want to disturb you with her troubles, but thought that she could keep matters going until you had taken your degree. She will not sell the estate before you have finished, and made yourself a new home.”</p>
				<p>Hede rose, and walked once or twice up and down the floor. Then he stopped opposite Alin.</p>
				<p>“But what on earth are you driving at, Alin? Do you want to make me believe that we are not rich?”</p>
				<p>“I know quite well that, until lately, you have been considered rich people at home,” Alin said. “But you can understand that things must come to an end when it is a case of always spending and never earning anything. It was a different thing when you had the mine.”</p>
				<p>Hede sat down again.</p>
				<p>“My mother would surely have told me if there were anything the matter,” he said. “I am grateful to you, Alin; but you have allowed yourself to be frightened by some silly stories.”</p>
				<p>“I thought that you did not know anything,” Alin continued obstinately. “At Munkhyttan your mother saves and works in order to get the money to keep you at Upsala, and to make it cheerful and pleasant for you when you are at home in the vacations. And in the meantime you are here doing nothing, because you don’t know there is trouble coming. I could not stand any longer seeing you deceiving each other. Her ladyship thought you were studying, and you thought she was rich. I could not let you destroy your prospects without saying anything.”</p>
				<p>Hede sat quietly for a moment, and meditated. Then he rose and gave Alin his hand with rather a sad smile.</p>
				<p>“You understand that I feel you are speaking the truth, even if I <em>will</em> not believe you? Thanks.”</p>
				<p>Alin joyfully shook his hand.</p>
				<p>“You must know, Hede, that if you will only work no harm is done. With your brains, you can take your degree in three or four years.”</p>
				<p>Hede straightened himself.</p>
				<p>“Do not be uneasy, Alin,” he said; “I am going to work hard now.”</p>
				<p>Alin rose and went towards the door, but hesitated. Before he reached it he turned round.</p>
				<p>“There was something else I wanted,” he said. He again became embarrassed. “I want you to lend me your violin until you have commenced reading in earnest.”</p>
				<p>“Lend you my violin?”</p>
				<p>“Yes; pack it up in a silk handkerchief, and put it in the case, and let me take it with me, or otherwise you will read to no purpose. You will begin to play as soon as I am out of the room. You are so accustomed to it now you cannot resist if you have it here. One cannot get over that kind of thing unless someone helps one; it gets the mastery over one.”</p>
				<p>Hede appeared unwilling.</p>
				<p>“This is madness, you know,” he said.</p>
				<p>“No, Hede, it is not. You know you have inherited it from the Squire. It runs in your blood. Ever since you have been your own master here in Upsala you have done nothing else but play. You live here in the outskirts of the town simply not to disturb anyone by your playing. You cannot help yourself in this matter. Let me have the violin.”</p>
				<p>“Well,” said Hede, “before I could not help playing, but now Munkhyttan is at stake; I am more fond of my home than of my violin.”</p>
				<p>But Alin was determined, and continued to ask for the violin.</p>
				<p>“What is the good of it?” Hede said. “If I want to play, I need not go many steps to borrow another violin.”</p>
				<p>“I know that,” Alin replied, “but I don’t think it would be so bad with another violin. It is your old Italian violin which is the greatest danger for you. And besides, I would suggest your locking yourself in for the first few days⁠—only until you have got fairly started.”</p>
				<p>He begged and begged, but Hede resisted; he would not stand anything so unreasonable as being a prisoner in his own room.</p>
				<p>Alin grew crimson.</p>
				<p>“I must have the violin with me,” he said, “or it is no use at all.” He spoke eagerly and excitedly. “I had not intended to say anything about it, but I know that it concerns more than Munkhyttan. I saw a young girl at the Promotion Ball in the spring who, people said, was engaged to you. I don’t dance, you know, but I liked to watch her when she was dancing, looking radiant like one of the lilies of the field. And when I heard that she was engaged to you, I felt sorry for her.”</p>
				<p>“Why?”</p>
				<p>“Because I knew that you would never succeed if you continued as you had begun. And then I swore that she should not have to spend her whole life waiting for one who never came. She should not sit and wither whilst waiting for you. I did not want to meet her in a few years with sharpened features and deep wrinkles round her mouth⁠—”</p>
				<p>He stopped suddenly; Hede’s glance had rested so searchingly upon him.</p>
				<p>But Gunnar Hede had already understood that Alin was in love with his fiancée. It moved him deeply that Alin under these circumstances tried to save him, and, influenced by this feeling, he yielded and gave him the violin.</p>
				<p>When Alin had gone, Hede read desperately for a whole hour, but then he threw away his book.</p>
				<p>It was not of much good his reading. It would be three or four years before he could be finished, and who could guarantee that the estate would not be sold in the meantime?</p>
				<p>He felt almost with terror how deeply he loved the old home. It was like witchery. Every room, every tree, stood clearly before him. He felt he could not part with any of it if he were to be happy. And he was to sit quietly with his books whilst all this was about to pass away from him.</p>
				<p>He became more and more restless; he felt the blood beating in his temples as if in a fever. And then he grew quite beside himself because he could not take his violin and play himself calm again.</p>
				<p>“My God!” he said, “Alin will drive me mad. First to tell me all this, and then to take away my violin! A man like I must feel the bow between his fingers in sorrow and in joy. I must do something; I must get money, but I have not an idea in my head. I cannot think without my violin.”</p>
				<p>He could not endure the feeling of being locked in. He was so angry with Alin, who had thought of this absurd plan, that he was afraid he might strike him the next time he came.</p>
				<p>Of course he would have played, if he had had the violin, for that was just what he needed. His blood rushed so wildly, that he was nearly going out of his mind.</p>
				<p>Just as Hede was longing most for his violin a wandering musician began to play outside. It was an old blind man. He played out of tune and without expression, but Hede was so overcome by hearing a violin just at this moment that he listened with tears in his eyes and with his hands folded.</p>
				<p>The next moment he flung open the window and climbed to the ground by the help of the creepers. He had no compunction at leaving his work. He thought the violin had simply come to comfort him in his misfortune.</p>
				<p>Hede had probably never before begged so humbly for anything as he did now, when he asked the old blind man to lend him his violin. He stood the whole time with his cap in his hand, although the old man was blind.</p>
				<p>The musician did not seem to understand what he wanted. He turned to the young girl who was leading him. Hede bowed to the poor girl and repeated his request. She looked at him, as if she must have eyes for them both. The glance from her big eyes was so steady that Hede thought he could feel where it struck him. It began with his collar, and it noticed that the frills of his shirt were well starched, then it saw that his coat was brushed, next that his boots were polished.</p>
				<p>Hede had never before been subjected to such close scrutiny. He saw clearly that he would not pass muster before those eyes.</p>
				<p>But it was not so, all the same. The young girl had a strange way of smiling. Her face was so serious, that one had the impression when she smiled that it was the first and only time she had ever looked happy; and now one of these rare smiles passed over her lips. She took the violin from the old man and handed it to Hede.</p>
				<p>“Play the waltz from <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera" xml:lang="de">Freischütz</i>, then,” she said.</p>
				<p>Hede thought it was strange that he should have to play a waltz just at that moment, but, as a matter of fact, it was all the same to him what he played, if he could only have a bow in his hand. That was all he wanted. The violin at once began to comfort him; it spoke to him in faint, cracked tones.</p>
				<p>“I am only a poor man’s violin,” it said; “but such as I am, I am a comfort and help to a poor blind man. I am the light and the colour and the brightness in his life. It is I who must comfort him in his poverty and old age and blindness.”</p>
				<p>Hede felt that the terrible depression that had cowed his hopes began to give way.</p>
				<p>“You are young and strong,” the violin said to him. “You can fight and strive; you can hold fast that which tries to escape you. Why are you downcast and without courage?”</p>
				<p>Hede had played with lowered eyes; now he threw back his head and looked at those who stood around him. There was quite a crowd of children and people from the street, who had come into the yard to listen to the music. It appeared, however, that they had not come solely for the sake of the music. The blind man and his companion were not the only ones in the troupe.</p>
				<p>Opposite Hede stood a figure in tights and spangles, and with bare arms crossed over his chest. He looked old and worn, but Hede could not help thinking that he looked a devil of a fellow with his high chest and long moustaches. And beside him stood his wife, little and fat, and not so very young either, but beaming with joy over her spangles and flowing gauze skirts.</p>
				<p>During the first bars of the music they stood still and counted, then a gracious smile passed over their faces, and they took each other’s hands and began to dance on a small carpet. And Hede saw that during all the equilibristic tricks they now performed the woman stood almost still, whilst her husband did all the work. He sprang over her, and twirled round her, and vaulted over her. The woman scarcely did anything else but kiss her hand to the spectators.</p>
				<p>But Hede did not really take much notice of them. His bow began to fly over the strings. It told him that there was happiness in fighting and overcoming. It almost deemed him happy because everything was at stake for him. Hede stood there, playing courage and hope into himself, and did not think of the old tightrope dancers.</p>
				<p>But suddenly he saw that they grew restless. They no longer smiled; they left off kissing their hands to the spectators; the acrobat made mistakes, and his wife began to sway to and fro in waltz time.</p>
				<p>Hede played more and more eagerly. He left off <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera" xml:lang="de">Freischütz</i> and rushed into an old “Nixie Polka,” one which generally sent all the people mad when played at the peasant festivals.</p>
				<p>The old tightrope dancers quite lost their heads. They stood in breathless astonishment, and at last they could resist no longer. They sprang into each other’s arms, and then they began to dance a waltz in the middle of the carpet.</p>
				<p>How they danced! dear me, how they danced! They took small, tripping steps, and whirled round in a small circle; they hardly went outside the carpet, and their faces beamed with joy and delight. There was the happiness of youth and the rapture of love over these two old people.</p>
				<p>The whole crowd was jubilant at seeing them dance. The serious little companion of the blind man smiled all over her face, and Hede grew much excited.</p>
				<p>Just fancy what an effect his violin could have! It made people quite forget themselves. It was a great power to have at his disposal. Any moment he liked he could take possession of his kingdom. Only a couple of years’ study abroad with a great master, and he could go all over the world, and by his playing earn riches and honour and fame.</p>
				<p>It seemed to Hede that these acrobats must have come to tell him this. That was the road he should follow; it lay before him clear and smooth. He said to himself: “I will⁠—I <em>will</em> become a musician! I <em>must</em> be one! This is better than studying. I can charm my fellow-men with my violin; I can become rich.”</p>
				<p>Hede stopped playing. The acrobats at once came up and complimented him. The man said his name was Blomgren. That was his real name; he had other names when he performed. He and his wife were old circus people. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren in former days had been called Miss Viola, and had performed on horseback; and although they had now left the circus, they were still true artists⁠—artists body and soul. That he had probably already noticed; that was why they could not resist his violin.</p>
				<p>Hede walked about with the acrobats for a couple of hours. He could not part with the violin, and the old artists’ enthusiasm for their profession appealed to him. He was simply testing himself. “I want to find out whether there is the proper stuff for an artist in me. I want to see if I can call forth enthusiasm. I want to see whether I can make children and idlers follow me from house to house.”</p>
				<p>On their way from house to house <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren threw an old threadbare mantle around him, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren enveloped herself in a brown cloak. Thus arrayed, they walked at Hede’s side and talked.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren would not speak of all the honour he and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren had received during the time they had performed in a real circus; but the <i xml:lang="fr">directeur</i> had given <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren her dismissal under the pretence that she was getting too stout. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren had not been dismissed: he had himself resigned his position. Surely no one could think that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren would remain with a <i xml:lang="fr">directeur</i> who had dismissed his wife!</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren loved her art, and for her sake <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren had made up his mind to live as a free artist, so that she could still continue to perform. During the winter, when it was too cold to give performances in the street, they performed in a tent. They had a very comprehensive repertoire. They gave pantomimes, and were jugglers and conjurers.</p>
				<p>The circus had cast them off, but Art had not, said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren. They served Art always. It was well worth being faithful to Art, even unto death. Always artists⁠—always. That was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren’s opinion, and it was also <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren’s.</p>
				<p>Hede walked quietly and listened. His thoughts flew restlessly from plan to plan. Sometimes events happen which become like symbols, like signs, which one must obey. There must be some meaning in what had now happened to him. If he could only understand it rightly, it might help him towards arriving at a wise resolution.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren asked the student to notice the young girl who was leading the blind man. Had he ever before seen such eyes? Did he not think that such eyes must mean something? Could one have those eyes without being intended for something great?</p>
				<p>Hede turned round and looked at the little pale girl. Yes, she had eyes like stars, set in a sad and rather thin face.</p>
				<p>“Our Lord knows always what He is about,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren; “and I also believe that He has some reason for letting such an artist as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren perform in the street. But what was He thinking about when He gave that girl those eyes and that smile?”</p>
				<p>“I will tell you something,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren; “she has not the slightest talent for Art. And with those eyes!”</p>
				<p>Hede had a suspicion that they were not talking to him, but simply for the benefit of the young girl. She was walking just behind them, and could hear every word.</p>
				<p>“She is not more than thirteen years old, and not by any means too old to learn something; but, impossible⁠—impossible, without the slightest talent! If one does not want to waste one’s time, sir, teach her to sew, but not to stand on her head. Her smile makes people quite mad about her,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren continued. “Simply on account of her smile she has had many offers from families wishful to adopt her. She could grow up in a well-to-do home if she would only leave her grandfather. But what does she want with a smile that makes people mad about her, when she will never appear either on horseback or on a trapeze?”</p>
				<p>“We know other artists,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren, “who pick up children in the street and train them for the profession when they cannot perform any longer themselves. There is more than one who has been lucky enough to create a star and obtain immense salaries for her. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren and I have never thought of the money; we have only thought of some day seeing Ingrid flying through a hoop whilst the whole circus resounded with applause. For us it would have been as if we were beginning life over again.”</p>
				<p>“Why do we keep her grandfather?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren. “Is he an artist fit for us? We could, no doubt, have got a previous member of a Hofkapell if we had wished. But we love that child; we cannot do without her; we keep the old man for her sake.”</p>
				<p>“Is it not naughty of her that she will not allow us to make an artist of her?” they said.</p>
				<p>Hede turned round. The little girl’s face wore an expression of suffering and patience. He could see that she knew that anyone who could not dance on the tightrope was a stupid and contemptible person.</p>
				<p>At the same moment they came to another house, but before they began their performance Hede sat down on an overturned wheelbarrow and began to preach. He defended the poor little girl. He reproached <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren for wishing to hand her over to the great, cruel public, who would love and applaud her for a time, but when she grew old and worn out, they would let her trudge along the streets in rain and cold. No; he or she was artist enough, who made a fellow-being happy. Ingrid should only have eyes and smiles for one, should keep them for one only; and this one should never leave her, but give her a safe home as long as he lived.</p>
				<p>Tears came into Hede’s eyes whilst he spoke. He spoke more to himself than to the others. He felt it suddenly as something terrible to be thrust out into the world, to be severed from the quiet home-life. He saw that the great, starlike eyes of the girl began to sparkle. It seemed as if she had understood every single word. It seemed as if she again felt the right to live.</p>
				<p>But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren and his wife had become very serious. They pressed Hede’s hand and promised him that they would never again try and persuade the little girl to become an artist. She should be allowed to lead the life she wished. He had touched them. They were artists⁠—artists body and soul; they understood what he meant when he spoke of love and faithfulness.</p>
				<p>Then Hede parted from them and went home. He no longer tried to find any secret meaning in his adventure. After all, it had meant nothing more than that he should save this poor sorrowful child from always grieving over her incapacity.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-story-of-a-country-house-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>Munkhyttan, the home of Gunnar Hede, was situated in a poor parish in the forests of Vesterdalarne. It was a large, thinly-populated parish, with which Nature had dealt very stingily. There were stony, forest-covered hills, and many small lakes. The people could not possibly have earned a livelihood there had they not had the right to travel about the country as pedlars. But to make up for it, the whole of this poor district was full of old tales of how poor peasant lads and lassies had gone into the world with a pack of goods on their backs, to return in gilded coaches, with the boxes under the seats filled with money.</p>
				<p>One of the very best stories was about Hede’s grandfather. He was the son of a poor musician, and had grown up with his violin in his hand, and when he was seventeen years old he had gone out into the world with his pack on his back. But wherever he went his violin had helped him in his business. He had by turns gathered people together by his music and sold them silk handkerchiefs, combs, and pins. All his trading had been brought about with music and merriment, and things had gone so well with him that he had at last been able to buy Munkhyttan, with its mine and ironworks, from the poverty-stricken Baron who then owned the property. Then he became the Squire, and the pretty daughter of the Baron became his wife.</p>
				<p>From that time the old family, as they were always called, had thought of nothing else but beautifying the place. They removed the main building on to the beautiful island which lay on the edge of a small lake, round which lay their fields and their mines. The upper story had been added in their time, for they wanted to have plenty of room for their numerous guests; and they had also added the two large flights of steps outside. They had planted ornamental trees all over the fir-covered island. They had made small winding pathways in the stony soil, and on the most beautiful spots they had built small pavilions, hanging like large birds’-nests over the lake. The beautiful French roses that grew on the terrace, the Dutch furniture, the Italian violin, had all been brought to the house by them. And it was they who had built the wall protecting the orchard from the north wind, and the conservatory.</p>
				<p>The old family were merry, kindhearted, old-fashioned people. The Squire’s wife certainly liked to be a little aristocratic; but that was not at all in the old Squire’s line. In the midst of all the luxury which surrounded him he never forgot what he had been, and in the room where he transacted his business, and where people came and went, the pack and the red-painted, homemade violin were hung right above the old man’s desk.</p>
				<p>Even after his death the pack and the violin remained in the same place. And every time the old man’s son and grandson saw them their hearts swelled with gratitude. It was these two poor implements that had created Munkhyttan, and Munkhyttan was the best thing in the world.</p>
				<p>Whatever the reason might be⁠—and it was probably because it seemed natural to the place that one lived a good, genial life there, free from trouble⁠—Hede’s family clung to the place with greater love than was good for it. And more especially Gunnar Hede was so strongly attached to it that people said that it was incorrect to say of him that he owned an estate. On the contrary, it was an old estate in Vesterdalarne that owned Gunnar Hede.</p>
				<p>If he had not made himself a slave of an old rambling manor-house and some acres of land and forest, and some stunted apple-trees, he would probably have continued his studies, or, better still, gone abroad to study music, which, after all, was no doubt his proper vocation in this world. But when he returned from Upsala, and it became clear to him that they really would have to sell the estate if he could not soon earn a lot of money, he decided upon giving up all his other plans, and made up his mind to go out into the world as a pedlar, as his grandfather before him had done.</p>
				<p>His mother and his fiancée besought him rather to sell the place than to sacrifice himself for it in this manner, but he was not to be moved. He put on peasant’s attire, bought goods, and began to travel about the country as a pedlar. He thought that if he only traded a couple of years he could earn enough to pay the debt and save the estate.</p>
				<p>And as far as the latter was concerned he was successful enough. But he brought upon himself a terrible misfortune.</p>
				<p>When he had walked about with his pack for a year or so he thought that he would try and earn a large sum of money at one stroke. He went far north and bought a large flock of goats, about a couple of hundred. And he and a comrade intended to drive them down to a large fair in Värmland, where goats cost twice as much as in the north. If he succeeded in selling all his goats, he would do a very good business.</p>
				<p>It was in the beginning of November, and there had not yet been any snow, when Hede and his comrade set out with their goats. The first day everything went well with them, but the second day, when they came to the great Fifty-Mile Forest, it began to snow. Much snow fell, and it stormed and blew severely. It was not long before it became difficult for the animals to make their way through the snow. Goats are certainly both plucky and hardy animals, and the herd struggled on for a considerable time; but the snowstorm lasted two days and two nights, and it was terribly cold.</p>
				<p>Hede did all he could to save the animals, but after the snow began to fall he could get them neither food nor water. And when they had worked their way through deep snow for a whole day they became very footsore. Their feet hurt them, and they would not go any longer. The first goat that threw itself down by the roadside and would not get up again and follow the herd Hede lifted on to his shoulder so as not to leave it behind. But when another and again another lay down he could not carry them. There was nothing to do but to look the other way and go on.</p>
				<p>Do you know what the Fifty-Mile Forest is like? Not a farmhouse, not a cottage, mile after mile, only forest; tall-stemmed fir-trees, with bark as hard as wood, and high branches; no young trees with soft bark and soft twigs that the animals could eat. If there had been no snow, they could have got through the forest in a couple of days; now they could not get through it at all. All the goats were left there, and the men too nearly perished. They did not meet a single human being the whole time. No one helped them.</p>
				<p>Hede tried to throw the snow to one side so that the goats could eat the moss; but the snow fell so thickly, and the moss was frozen fast to the ground. And how could he get food for two hundred animals in this way?</p>
				<p>He bore it bravely until the goats began to moan. The first day they were a lively, rather noisy herd. He had had hard work to make them all keep together, and prevent them from butting each other to death. But when they seemed to understand that they could not be saved their nature changed, and they completely lost their courage. They all began to bleat and moan, not faintly and peevishly, as goats usually do, but loudly, louder and louder as the danger increased. And when Hede heard their cries he felt quite desperate.</p>
				<p>They were in the midst of the wild, desolate forest; there was no help whatever obtainable. Goat after goat dropped down by the roadside. The snow gathered round them and covered them. When Hede looked back at this row of drifts by the wayside, each hiding the body of an animal, of which one could still see the projecting horns and the hoofs, then his brain began to give way.</p>
				<p>He rushed at the animals, which allowed themselves to be covered by the snow, swung his whip over them, and hit them. It was the only way to save them, but they did not stir. He took them by the horns and dragged them along. They allowed themselves to be dragged, but they did not move a foot themselves. When he let go his hold of their horns, they licked his hands, as if beseeching him to help them. As soon as he went up to them they licked his hands.</p>
				<p>All this had such a strong effect upon Hede that he felt he was on the point of going out of his mind.</p>
				<p>It is not certain, however, that things would have gone so badly with him had he not, after it was all over in the forest, gone to see one whom he loved dearly. It was not his mother, but his sweetheart. He thought himself that he had gone there because he ought to tell her at once that he had lost so much money that he would not be able to marry for many years. But no doubt he went to see her solely to hear her say that she loved him quite as much in spite of his misfortunes. He thought that she could drive away the memory of the Fifty-Mile Forest.</p>
				<p>She could, perhaps, have done this, but she would not. She was already displeased because Hede went about with a pack and looked like a peasant; she thought that for that reason alone it was difficult to love him as much as before. Now, when he told her that he must still go on doing this for many years, she said that she could no longer wait for him. This last blow was too much for Hede; his mind gave way.</p>
				<p>He did not grow quite mad, however; he retained so much of his senses that he could attend to his business. He even did better than others, for it amused people to make fun of him; he was always welcome at the peasants’ houses. People plagued and teased him, but that was in a way good for him, as he was so anxious to become rich. And in the course of a few years he had earned enough to pay all his debts, and he could have lived free from worry on his estate. But this he did not understand; he went about half-witted and silly from farm to farm, and he had no longer any idea to what class of people he really belonged.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-story-of-a-country-house-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Raglanda was the name of a parish in the north of East Värmland, near the borders of Dalarne, where the Dean had a large house, but the pastor only a small and poor one. But poor as they were at the small parsonage, they had been charitable enough to adopt a poor girl. She was a little girl, Ingrid by name, and she had come to the parsonage when she was thirteen years old.</p>
				<p>The pastor had accidentally seen her at a fair, where she sat crying outside the tent of some acrobats. He had stopped and asked her why she was crying, and she had told him that her blind grandfather was dead, and that she had no relatives left. She now travelled with a couple of acrobats, and they were good to her, but she cried because she was so stupid that she could never learn to dance on the tightrope and help to earn any money.</p>
				<p>There was a sorrowful grace over the child which touched the pastor’s heart. He said at once to himself that he could not allow such a little creature to go to the bad amongst these wandering tramps. He went into the tent, where he saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren, and offered to take the child home with him. The old acrobats began to weep, and said that although the girl was entirely unfitted for the profession, they would so very much like to keep her; but at the same time they thought she would be happier in a real home with people who lived in the same place all the year round, and therefore they were willing to give her up to the pastor if he would only promise them that she should be like one of his own children.</p>
				<p>This he had promised, and from that time the young girl had lived at the parsonage. She was a quiet, gentle child, full of love and tender care for those around her. At first her adopted parents loved her very dearly, but as she grew older she developed a strong inclination to lose herself in dreams and fancies. She lived in a world of visions, and in the middle of the day she could let her work fall and be lost in dreams. But the pastor’s wife, who was a clever and hardworking woman, did not approve of this. She found fault with the young girl for being lazy and slow, and tormented her by her severity so that she became timid and unhappy.</p>
				<p>When she had completed her nineteenth year, she fell dangerously ill. They did not quite know what was the matter with her, for this happened long ago, when there was no doctor at Raglanda, but the girl was very ill. They soon saw she was so ill that she could not live.</p>
				<p>She herself did nothing but pray to God that He would take her away from this world. She would so like to die, she said.</p>
				<p>Then it seemed as if our Lord would try whether she was in earnest. One night she felt that she grew stiff and cold all over her body, and a heavy lethargy fell upon her. “I think this must be death,” she said to herself.</p>
				<p>But the strange thing was that she did not quite lose consciousness. She knew that she lay as if she were dead, knew that they wrapped her in her shroud and laid her in her coffin, but she felt no fear of being buried, although she was still alive. She had but the one thought that she was happy because she was about to die and leave this troublesome life.</p>
				<p>The only thing she was uneasy about was lest they should discover that she was not really dead and would not bury her. Life must have been very bitter to her, inasmuch as she felt no fear of death whatever.</p>
				<p>But no one discovered that she was living. She was conveyed to the church, carried to the churchyard, and lowered into the grave.</p>
				<p>The grave, however, was not filled in; she had been buried before the service on Sunday morning, as was the custom at Raglanda. The mourners had gone into church after the funeral, and the coffin was left in the open grave; but as soon as the service was over they would come back, and help the gravedigger to fill in the grave.</p>
				<p>The young girl knew everything that happened, but felt no fear. She had not been able to make the slightest movement to show that she was alive, even if she had wanted to; but even if she had been able to move, she would not have done so; the whole time she was happy because she was as good as dead.</p>
				<p>But, on the other hand, one could hardly say that she was alive. She had neither the use of her mind nor of her senses. It was only that part of the soul which dreams dreams during the night that was still living within her.</p>
				<p>She could not even think enough to realize how terrible it would be for her to awake when the grave was filled in. She had no more power over her mind than has one who dreams.</p>
				<p>“I should like to know,” she thought, “if there is anything in the whole wide world that could make me wish to live.”</p>
				<p>As soon as that thought rushed through her it seemed to her as if the lid of the coffin, and the handkerchief which had been placed over her face, became transparent, and she saw before her riches and beautiful raiment, and lovely gardens with delicious fruits.</p>
				<p>“No, I do not care for any of these things,” she said, and she closed her eyes for their glories.</p>
				<p>When she again looked up they had disappeared, but instead she saw quite distinctly a little angel of God sitting on the edge of the grave.</p>
				<p>“Good morning, thou little angel of God,” she said to him.</p>
				<p>“Good morning, Ingrid,” the angel said. “Whilst thou art lying here doing nothing, I would like to speak a little with thee about days gone by.”</p>
				<p>Ingrid heard distinctly every word the angel said; but his voice was not like anything she had ever heard before. It was more like a stringed instrument; it was not like singing, but like the tones of a violin or the clang of a harp.</p>
				<p>“Ingrid,” the angel said, “dost thou remember, whilst thy grandfather was still living, that thou once met a young student, who went with thee from house to house playing the whole day on thy grandfather’s violin?”</p>
				<p>The girl’s face was lighted by a smile.</p>
				<p>“Dost thou think I have forgotten this?” she said. “Ever since that time no day has passed when I have not thought of him.”</p>
				<p>“And no night when thou hast not dreamt of him?”</p>
				<p>“No, not a night when I have not dreamt of him.”</p>
				<p>“And thou wilt die, although thou rememberest him so well,” said the angel. “Then thou wilt never be able to see him again.”</p>
				<p>When he said this it was as if the dead girl felt all the happiness of love, but even that could not tempt her.</p>
				<p>“No, no,” she said; “I am afraid to live; I would rather die.”</p>
				<p>Then the angel waved his hand, and Ingrid saw before her a wide waste of desert. There were no trees, and the desert was barren and dry and hot, and extended in all directions without any limits. In the sand there lay, here and there, objects which at the first glance looked like pieces of rock, but when she examined them more closely, she saw they were the immense living animals of fairy tales, with huge claws and great jaws, with sharp teeth; they lay in the sand, watching for prey. And between these terrible animals the student came walking along. He went quite fearlessly, without suspecting that the figures around him were living.</p>
				<p>“But warn him! do warn him!” Ingrid said to the angel in unspeakable fear. “Tell him that they are living, and that he must take care.”</p>
				<p>“I am not allowed to speak to him,” said the angel with his clear voice; “thou must thyself warn him.”</p>
				<p>The apparently dead girl felt with horror that she lay powerless, and could not rush to save the student. She made one futile effort after the other to raise herself, but the impotence of death bound her. But then at last, at last, she felt her heart begin to beat, the blood rushed through her veins, the stiffness of death was loosened in her body. She arose and hastened towards him.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-story-of-a-country-house-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>It is quite certain the sun loves the open places outside the small village churches. Has no one ever noticed that one never sees so much sunshine as during the morning service outside a small, whitewashed church? Nowhere else does one see such radiant streams of light, nowhere else is the air so devoutly quiet. The sun simply keeps watch that no one remains on the church hill gossiping. It wants them all to sit quietly in church and listen to the sermon⁠—that is why it sends such a wealth of sunny rays on to the ground outside the church wall.</p>
				<p>Perhaps one must not take it for granted that the sun keeps watch outside the small churches every Sunday; but so much is certain, that the morning Ingrid had been placed in the grave in the churchyard at Raglanda, it spread a burning heat over the open space outside the church. Even the flint stones looked as if they might take fire as they lay and sparkled in the wheel-ruts. The short, downtrodden grass curled, so that it looked like dry moss, whilst the yellow dandelions which grew amongst the grass spread themselves out on their long stems, so that they became as large as asters.</p>
				<p>A man from Dalarne came wandering along the road⁠—one of those men who go about selling knives and scissors. He was clad in a long, white sheepskin coat, and on his back he had a large black leather pack. He had been walking with this burden for several hours without finding it too hot, but when he had left the high road, and came to the open place outside the church, he stopped and took off his hat in order to dry the perspiration from his forehead.</p>
				<p>As the man stood there bareheaded, he looked both handsome and clever. His forehead was high and white, with a deep wrinkle between the eyebrows; the mouth was well formed, with thin lips. His hair was parted in the middle; it was cut short at the back, but hung over his ears, and was inclined to curl. He was tall, and strongly, but not coarsely, built; in every respect well proportioned. But what was wrong about him was his glance, which was unsteady, and the pupils of his eyes rolled restlessly, and were drawn far into the sockets, as if to hide themselves. There was something drawn about the mouth, something dull and heavy, which did not seem to belong to the face.</p>
				<p>He could not be quite right, either, or he would not have dragged that heavy pack about on a Sunday. If he had been quite in his senses, he would have known that it was of no use, as he could not sell anything in any case. None of the other men from Dalarne who walked about from village to village bent their backs under this burden on a Sunday, but they went to the house of God free and erect as other men.</p>
				<p>But this poor fellow probably did not know it was a holy day until he stood in the sunshine outside the church and heard the singing. He was sensible enough at once to understand that he could not do any business, and then his brain began to work as to how he should spend the day.</p>
				<p>He stood for a long time and stared in front of him. When everything went its usual course, he had no difficulty in managing. He was not so bad but that he could go from farm to farm all through the week and attend to his business, but he never could get accustomed to the Sunday⁠—that always came upon him as a great, unexpected trouble.</p>
				<p>His eyes became quite fixed, and the muscles of his forehead swelled.</p>
				<p>The first thought that took shape in his brain was that he should go into the church and listen to the singing, but he would not accept this suggestion. He was very fond of singing, but he dared not go into the church. He was not afraid of human beings, but in some churches there were such quaint, uncanny pictures, which represented creatures of which he would rather not think.</p>
				<p>At last his brain worked round to the thought that, as this was a church, there would probably also be a churchyard, and when he could take refuge in a churchyard all was well. One could not offer him anything better. If on his wanderings he saw a churchyard, he always went in and sat there awhile, even if it were in the middle of a workaday week.</p>
				<p>Now that he wanted to go to the churchyard a new difficulty suddenly arose. The burial-place at Raglanda does not lie quite near the church, which is built on a hill, but on the other side of the road; and he could not get to the entrance of the churchyard without passing along the road where the horses of the churchgoers were standing tied up.</p>
				<p>All the horses stood with their heads deep in bundles of hay and nosebags, chewing. There was no question of their being able to do the man any harm, but he had his own ideas as to the danger of going past such a long row of animals.</p>
				<p>Two or three times he made an attempt, but his courage failed him, so that he was obliged to turn back. He was not afraid that the horses would bite or kick. It was quite enough for him that they were so near that they could see him. It was quite enough that they could shake their bridles and scrape the earth with their hoofs.</p>
				<p>At last a moment came when all the horses were looking down, and seemed to be eating for a wager. Then he began to make his way between them. He held his sheepskin cloak tightly around him so that it should not flap and betray him, and he went on tiptoe as lightly as he could. When a horse raised its eyelid and looked at him, he at once stopped and curtsied. He wanted to be polite in this great danger, but surely animals were amenable to reason, and could understand that he could not bow when he had a pack full of hardware upon his back; he could only curtsy.</p>
				<p>He sighed deeply, for in this world it was a sad and troublesome thing to be so afraid of all four-footed animals as he was. He was really not afraid of any other animals than goats, and he would not have been at all afraid of horses and dogs and cats had he only been quite sure that they were not a kind of transformed goats. But he never was quite sure of that, so as a matter of fact it was just as bad for him as if he had been afraid of all kinds of four-footed animals.</p>
				<p>It was no use his thinking of how strong he was, and that these small peasant horses never did any harm to anyone: he who has become possessed of such fears cannot reason with himself. Fear is a heavy burden, and it is hard for him who must always carry it.</p>
				<p>It was strange that he managed to get past all the horses. The last few steps he took in two long jumps, and when he got into the churchyard he closed the gate after him, and began to threaten the horses with his clenched fist.</p>
				<p>“You wretched, miserable, accursed goats!”</p>
				<p>He did that to all animals. He could not help calling them goats, and that was very stupid of him, for it had procured him a name which he did not like. Everyone who met him called him the “Goat.” But he would not own to this name. He wanted to be called by his proper name, but apparently no one knew his real name in that district.</p>
				<p>He stood a little while at the gate, rejoicing at having escaped from the horses, but he soon went further into the churchyard. At every cross and every stone he stopped and curtsied, but this was not from fear: this was simply from joy at seeing these dear old friends. All at once he began to look quite gentle and mild. They were exactly the same crosses and stones he had so often seen before. They looked just as usual. How well he knew them again! He must say “Good morning” to them.</p>
				<p>How nice it was in the churchyard! There were no animals about there, and there were no people to make fun of him. It was best there, when it was quite quiet as now; but even if there were people, they did not disturb him. He certainly knew many pretty meadows and woods which he liked still better, but there he was never left in peace. They could not by any means compare with the churchyard. And the churchyard was better than the forest, for in the forest the loneliness was so great that he was frightened by it. Here it was quiet, as in the depths of the forest; but he was not without company. Here people were sleeping under every stone and every mound; just the company he wanted in order not to feel lonely and strange.</p>
				<p>He went straight to the open grave. He went there partly because there were some shady trees, and partly because he wanted company. He thought, perhaps, that the dead who had so recently been laid in the grave might be a better protection against his loneliness than those who had passed away long ago.</p>
				<p>He bent his knees, with his back to the great mound of earth at the edge of the grave, and succeeded in pushing the pack upwards, so that it stood firmly on the mound, and he then loosened the heavy straps that fastened it. It was a great day⁠—a holiday. He also took off his coat. He sat down on the grass with a feeling of great pleasure, so close to the grave that his long legs, with the stockings tied under the knee, and the heavy laced shoes dangled over the edge of the grave.</p>
				<p>For a while he sat still, with his eyes steadily fixed upon the coffin. When one was possessed by such fear as he was, one could not be too careful. But the coffin did not move in the least; it was impossible to suspect it of containing any snare.</p>
				<p>He was no sooner certain of this than he put his hand into a side-pocket of the pack and took out a violin and bow, and at the same time he nodded to the dead in the grave. As he was so quiet he should hear something pretty.</p>
				<p>This was something very unusual for him. There were not many who were allowed to hear him play. No one was ever allowed to hear him play at the farms, where they set the dogs at him and called him the “Goat”; but sometimes he would play in a house where they spoke softly, and went about quietly, and did not ask him if he wanted to buy any goatskins. At such places he took out his violin and treated them to some music; and this was a great favour⁠—the greatest he could bestow upon anybody.</p>
				<p>As he sat there and played at the edge of the grave it did not sound amiss; he did not play a wrong note, and he played so softly and gently that it could hardly be heard at the next grave. The strange thing about it was that it was not the man who could play, but it was his violin that could remember some small melodies. They came forth from the violin as soon as he let the bow glide over it. It might not, perhaps, have meant so much to others, but for him, who could not remember a single tune, it was the most precious gift of all to possess such a violin that could play by itself.</p>
				<p>Whilst he played he sat with a beaming smile on his face. It was the violin that spoke and spoke; he only listened. Was it not strange that one heard all these beautiful things as soon as one let the bow glide over the strings? The violin did that. It knew how it ought to be, and the Dalar man only sat and listened. Melodies grew out of that violin as grass grows out of the earth. No one could understand how it happened. Our Lord had ordered it so.</p>
				<p>The Dalar man intended to remain sitting there the whole day, and let the dear tunes grow out of the violin like small white and many-coloured flowers. He would play a whole meadowful of flowers, play a whole long valleyful, a whole wide plain.</p>
				<p>But she who lay in the coffin distinctly heard the violin, and upon her it had a strange effect. The tones had made her dream, and what she had seen in her dreams caused her such emotion that her heart began to beat, her blood to flow, and she awoke.</p>
				<p>But all she had lived through while she lay there, apparently dead, the thoughts she had had, and also her last dream⁠—everything vanished in the same moment she awoke to consciousness. She did not even know that she was lying in her coffin, but thought she was still lying ill at home in her bed. She only thought it strange that she was still alive. A little while ago, before she fell asleep, she had been in the pangs of death. Surely, all must have been over with her long ago. She had taken leave of her adopted parents, and of her brothers and sisters, and of the servants. The Dean had been there himself to administer the last Communion, for her adopted father did not think he could bear to give it to her himself. For several days she had put away all earthly thoughts from her mind. It was incomprehensible that she was not dead.</p>
				<p>She wondered why it was so dark in the room where she lay. There had been a light all the other nights during her illness. And then they had let the blankets fall off the bed. She was lying there getting as cold as ice. She raised herself a little to pull the blankets over her. In doing so she knocked her head against the lid of the coffin, and fell back with a little scream of pain. She had knocked herself rather severely, and immediately became unconscious again. She lay as motionless as before, and it seemed as if life had again left her.</p>
				<p>The Dalar man, who had heard both the knock and the cry, immediately laid down his violin and sat listening; but there was nothing more to be heard⁠—nothing whatever. He began again to look at the coffin as attentively as before. He sat nodding his head, as if he would say “Yes” to what he was himself thinking about, namely, that nothing in this world was to be depended upon. Here he had had the best and most silent of comrades, but had he not also been disappointed in him?</p>
				<p>He sat and looked at the coffin, as if trying to see right through it. At last, when it continued quite still, he took his violin again and began to play. But the violin would not play any longer. However gently and tenderly he drew his bow, there came forth no melody. This was so sad that he was nearly crying. He had intended to sit still and listen to his violin the whole day, and now it would not play any more.</p>
				<p>He could quite understand the reason. The violin was uneasy and afraid of what had moved in the coffin. It had forgotten all its melodies, and thought only of what it could be that had knocked at the coffin-lid. That is how it is one forgets everything when one is afraid. He saw that he would have to quiet the violin if he wanted to hear more.</p>
				<p>He had felt so happy, more so than for many years. If there was really anything bad in the coffin, would it not be better to let it out? Then the violin would be glad, and beautiful flowers would again grow out of it.</p>
				<p>He quickly opened his big pack, and began to rummage amongst his knives and saws and hammers until he found a screwdriver. In another moment he was down in the grave on his knees and unscrewing the coffin-lid. He took out one screw after the other, until at last he could raise the lid against the side of the grave; at the same moment the handkerchief fell from off the face of the apparently dead girl. As soon as the fresh air reached Ingrid, she opened her eyes. Now she saw that it was light. They must have removed her. Now she was lying in a yellow chamber with a green ceiling, and a large chandelier was hanging from the ceiling. The chamber was small, but the bed was still smaller. Why had she the sensation of her arms and legs being tied? Was it because she should lie still in the little narrow bed? It was strange that they had placed a hymnbook under her chin; they only did that with corpses. Between her fingers she had a little bouquet. Her adopted mother had cut a few sprigs from her flowering myrtle, and laid them in her hands. Ingrid was very much surprised. What had come to her adopted mother? She saw that they had given her a pillow with broad lace, and a fine hemstitched sheet. She was very glad of that; she liked to have things nice. Still, she would rather have had a warm blanket over her. It could surely not be good for a sick person to lie without a blanket. Ingrid was nearly putting her hands to her eyes and beginning to cry, she was so bitterly cold. At the same moment she felt something hard and cold against her cheek. She could not help smiling. It was the old, red wooden horse, the old three-legged Camilla, that lay beside her on the pillow. Her little brother, who could never sleep at night without having it with him in his bed, had put it in her bed. It was very sweet of her little brother. Ingrid felt still more inclined to cry when she understood that her little brother had wanted to comfort her with his wooden horse.</p>
				<p>But she did not get so far as crying. The truth all at once flashed upon her. Her little brother had given her the wooden horse, and her mother had given her her white myrtle flowers, and the hymnbook had been placed under her chin, because they had thought she was dead.</p>
				<p>Ingrid took hold of the sides of the coffin with both hands and raised herself. The little narrow bed was a coffin, and the little narrow chamber was a grave. It was all very difficult to understand. She could not understand that this concerned her, that it was she who had been swathed like a corpse and placed in the grave. She must be lying all the same in her bed, and be seeing or dreaming all this. She would soon find out that this was no reality, but that everything was as usual.</p>
				<p>All at once she found the explanation of the whole thing⁠—“I often have such strange dreams. This is only a vision”⁠—and she sighed, relieved and happy. She laid herself down in her coffin again; she was so sure that it was her own bed, for that was not very wide either.</p>
				<p>All this time the Dalar man stood in the grave, quite close to the foot of the coffin. He only stood a few feet from her, but she had not seen him; that was probably because he had tried to hide himself in the corner of the grave as soon as the dead in the coffin had opened her eyes and begun to move. She could, perhaps, have seen him, although he held the coffin-lid before him as a screen, had there not been something like a white mist before her eyes so that she could only see things quite near her distinctly. Ingrid could not even see that there were earthen walls around her. She had taken the sun to be a large chandelier, and the shady lime-trees for a roof. The poor Dalar man stood and waited for the thing that moved in the coffin to go away. It did not strike him that it would not go unrequested. Had it not knocked because it wanted to get out? He stood for a long time with his head behind the coffin-lid and waited, that it should go. He peeped over the lid when he thought that now it must have gone. But it had not moved; it remained lying on its bed of shavings.</p>
				<p>He could not put up with it any longer; he must really make an end of it. It was a long time since his violin had spoken so prettily as today, he longed to sit again quietly with it. Ingrid, who had nearly fallen asleep again, suddenly heard herself addressed in the singsong Dalar dialect:</p>
				<p>“Now, I think it is time you got up.”</p>
				<p>As soon as he had said this he hid his head. He shook so much over his boldness that he nearly let the lid fall.</p>
				<p>But the white mist which had been before Ingrid’s eyes disappeared completely when she heard a human being speaking. She saw a man standing in the corner, at the foot of the coffin, holding a coffin-lid before him. She saw at once that she could not lie down again and think it was a vision. Surely he was a reality, which she must try and make out. It certainly looked as if the coffin were a coffin, and the grave a grave, and that she herself a few minutes ago was nothing but a swathed and buried corpse. For the first time she was terror-stricken at what had happened to her. To think that she could really have been dead that moment! She could have been a hideous corpse, food for worms. She had been placed in the coffin for them to throw earth upon her; she was worth no more than a piece of turf; she had been thrown aside altogether. The worms were welcome to eat her; no one would mind about that.</p>
				<p>Ingrid needed so badly to have a fellow-creature near her in her great terror. She had recognized the Goat directly he put up his head. He was an old acquaintance from the parsonage; she was not in the least afraid of him. She wanted him to come close to her. She did not mind in the least that he was an idiot. He was, at any rate, a living being. She wanted him to come so near to her that she could feel she belonged to the living and not to the dead.</p>
				<p>“Oh, for God’s sake, come close to me!” she said, with tears in her voice.</p>
				<p>She raised herself in the coffin and stretched out her arms to him.</p>
				<p>But the Dalar man only thought of himself. If she were so anxious to have him near her, he resolved to make his own terms.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” he said, “if you will go away.”</p>
				<p>Ingrid at once tried to comply with his request, but she was so tightly swathed in the sheet that she found it difficult to get up.</p>
				<p>“You must come and help me,” she said.</p>
				<p>She said this, partly because she was obliged to do it, and partly because she was afraid that she had not quite escaped death. She must be near someone living.</p>
				<p>He actually went near her, squeezing himself between the coffin and the side of the grave. He bent over her, lifted her out of the coffin, and put her down on the grass at the side of the open grave.</p>
				<p>Ingrid could not help it. She threw her arms round his neck, laid her head on his shoulder and sobbed. Afterwards she could not understand how she had been able to do this, and that she was not afraid of him. It was partly from joy that he was a human being⁠—a living human being⁠—and partly from gratitude, because he had saved her.</p>
				<p>What would have become of her if it had not been for him? It was he who had raised the coffin-lid, who had brought her back to life. She certainly did not know how it had all happened, but it was surely he who had opened the coffin. What would have happened to her if he had not done this? She would have awakened to find herself imprisoned in the black coffin. She would have knocked and shouted; but who would have heard her six feet below the ground? Ingrid dared not think of it; she was entirely absorbed with gratitude because she had been saved. She must have someone she could thank. She must lay her head on someone’s breast and cry from gratitude.</p>
				<p>The most extraordinary thing, almost, that happened that day was, that the Dalar man did not repulse her. But it was not quite clear to him that she was alive. He thought she was dead, and he knew it was not advisable to offend anyone dead. But as soon as he could manage, he freed himself from her and went down into the grave again. He placed the lid carefully on the coffin, put in the screws and fastened it as before. Then he thought the coffin would be quite still, and the violin would regain its peace and its melodies.</p>
				<p>In the meantime Ingrid sat on the grass and tried to collect her thoughts. She looked towards the church and discovered the horses and the carriages on the hillside. Then she began to realize everything. It was Sunday; they had placed her in the grave in the morning, and now they were in church.</p>
				<p>A great fear now seized Ingrid. The service would, perhaps, soon be over, and then all the people would come out and see her. And she had nothing on but a sheet! She was almost naked. Fancy, if all these people came and saw her in this state! They would never forget the sight. And she would be ashamed of it all her life.</p>
				<p>Where should she get some clothes? For a moment she thought of throwing the Dalar man’s fur coat round her, but she did not think that that would make her any more like other people.</p>
				<p>She turned quickly to the crazy man, who was still working at the coffin-lid.</p>
				<p>“Oh,” she said, “will you let me creep into your pack?”</p>
				<p>In a moment she stood by the great leather pack, which contained goods enough to fill a whole market-stall, and began to open it.</p>
				<p>“You must come and help me.”</p>
				<p>She did not ask in vain. When the Dalar man saw her touching his wares he came up at once.</p>
				<p>“Are you touching my pack?” he asked threateningly.</p>
				<p>Ingrid did not notice that he spoke angrily; she considered him to be her best friend all the time.</p>
				<p>“Oh, dear good man,” she said, “help me to hide, so that people will not see me. Put your wares somewhere or other, and let me creep into the pack, and carry me home. Oh, do do it! I live at the Parsonage, and it is only a little way from here. You know where it is.”</p>
				<p>The man stood and looked at her with stupid eyes. She did not know whether he had understood a word of what she said. She repeated it, but he made no sign of obeying her. She began again to take the things out of the pack. Then he stamped on the ground and tore the pack from her.</p>
				<p>However should Ingrid be able to make him do what she wanted?</p>
				<p>On the grass beside her lay a violin and a bow. She took them up mechanically⁠—she did not know herself why. She had probably been so much in the company of people playing the violin that she could not bear to see an instrument lying on the ground.</p>
				<p>As soon as she touched the violin he let go the pack, and tore the violin from her. He was evidently quite beside himself when anyone touched his violin. He looked quite malicious.</p>
				<p>What in the world could she do to get away before people came out of church?</p>
				<p>She began to promise him all sorts of things, just as one promises children when one wants them to be good.</p>
				<p>“I will ask father to buy a whole dozen of scythes from you. I will lock up all the dogs when you come to the Parsonage. I will ask mother to give you a good meal.”</p>
				<p>But there was no sign of his giving way. She bethought herself of the violin, and said in her despair:</p>
				<p>“If you will carry me to the Parsonage, I will play for you.”</p>
				<p>At last a smile flashed across his face. That was evidently what he wanted.</p>
				<p>“I will play for you the whole afternoon; I will play for you as long as you like.”</p>
				<p>“Will you teach the violin new melodies?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Of course I will.”</p>
				<p>But Ingrid now became both surprised and unhappy, for he took hold of the pack and pulled it towards him. He dragged it over the graves, and the sweet-williams and southernwood that grew on them were crushed under it as if it were a roller. He dragged it to a heap of branches and wizened leaves and old wreaths lying near the wall round the churchyard. There he took all the things out of the pack, and hid them well under the heap. When it was empty he returned to Ingrid.</p>
				<p>“Now you can get in,” he said.</p>
				<p>Ingrid stepped into the pack, and crouched down on the wooden bottom. The man fastened all the straps as carefully as when he went about with his usual wares, bent down so that he nearly went on his knees, put his arms through the braces, buckled a couple of straps across his chest, and stood up. When he had gone a few steps he began to laugh. His pack was so light that he could have danced with it.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>It was only about a mile from the church to the Parsonage. The Dalar man could walk it in twenty minutes. Ingrid’s only wish was that he would walk so quickly that she could get home before the people came back from church. She could not bear the idea of so many people seeing her. She would like to get home when only her mother and the maidservants were there.</p>
				<p>Ingrid had taken with her the little bouquet of flowers from her adopted mother’s myrtle. She was so pleased with it that she kissed it over and over again. It made her think more kindly of her adopted mother than she had ever done before. But in any case she would, of course, think kindly of her now. One who has come straight from the grave must think kindly and gently of everything living and moving on the face of the earth.</p>
				<p>She could now understand so well that the Pastor’s wife was bound to love her own children more than her adopted daughter. And when they were so poor at the Parsonage that they could not afford to keep a nursemaid, she could see now that it was quite natural that she should look after her little brothers and sisters. And when her brothers and sisters were not good to her, it was because they had become accustomed to think of her as their nurse. It was not so easy for them to remember that she had come to the Parsonage to be their sister.</p>
				<p>And, after all, it all came from their being poor. When father some day got another living, and became Dean, or even Rector, everything would surely come right. Then they would love her again, as they did when she first came to them. The good old times would be sure to come back again. Ingrid kissed her flowers. It had not been mother’s intention, perhaps, to be hard; it was only worry that had made her so strange and unkind.</p>
				<p>But now it would not matter how unkind they were to her. In the future nothing could hurt her, for now she would always be glad, simply because she was alive. And if things should ever be really bad again, she would only think of mother’s myrtle and her little brother’s horse.</p>
				<p>It was happiness enough to know that she was being carried along the road alive. This morning no one had thought that she would ever again go over these roads and hills. And the fragrant clover and the little birds singing and the beautiful shady trees, which had all been a source of joy for the living, had not even existed for her. But she had not much time for reflection, for in twenty minutes the Dalar man had reached the Parsonage.</p>
				<p>No one was at home but the Pastor’s wife and the maidservants, just as Ingrid had wished. The Pastor’s wife had been busy the whole morning cooking for the funeral feast. She soon expected the guests, and everything was nearly ready. She had just been into the bedroom to put on her black dress. She glanced down the road to the church, but there were still no carriages to be seen. So she went once again into the kitchen to taste the food.</p>
				<p>She was quite satisfied, for everything was as it ought to be, and one cannot help being glad for that, even if one is in mourning. There was only one maid in the kitchen, and that was the one the Pastor’s wife had brought with her from her old home, so she felt she could speak to her in confidence.</p>
				<p>“I must confess, Lisa,” she said, “I think anyone would be pleased with having such a funeral.”</p>
				<p>“If she could only look down and see all the fuss you make of her,” Lisa said, “she would be pleased.”</p>
				<p>“Ah!” said the Pastor’s wife, “I don’t think she would ever be pleased with me.”</p>
				<p>“She is dead now,” said the girl, “and I am not the one to say anything against one who is hardly yet under the ground.”</p>
				<p>“I have had to bear many a hard word from my husband for her sake,” said the mistress.</p>
				<p>The Pastor’s wife felt she wanted to speak with someone about the dead girl. Her conscience had pricked her a little on her account, and this was why she had arranged such a grand funeral feast. She thought her conscience might leave her alone now she had had so much trouble over the funeral, but it did not do so by any means. Her husband also reproached himself, and said that the young girl had not been treated like one of their own children, and that they had promised she should be when they adopted her; and he said it would have been better if they had never taken her, when they could not help letting her see that they loved their own children more. And now the Pastor’s wife felt she must talk to someone about the young girl, to hear whether people thought she had treated her badly.</p>
				<p>She saw that Lisa began to stir the pan violently, as if she had difficulty in controlling her anger. She was a clever girl, who thoroughly understood how to get into her mistress’s good books.</p>
				<p>“I must say,” Lisa began, “that when one has a mother who always looks after one, and takes care that one is neat and clean, one might at least try to obey and please her. And when one is allowed to live in a good Parsonage, and to be educated respectably, one ought at least to give some return for it, and not always go idling about and dreaming. I should like to know what would have happened if you had not taken the poor thing in. I suppose she would have been running about with those acrobats, and have died in the streets, like any other poor wretch.”</p>
				<p>A man from Dalarne came across the yard; he had his pack on his back, although it was Sunday. He came very quietly through the open kitchen-door, and curtsied when he entered, but no one took any notice of him. Both the mistress and the maid saw him, but as they knew him, they did not think it necessary to interrupt their conversation.</p>
				<p>The Pastor’s wife was anxious to continue it; she felt she was about to hear what she needed to ease her conscience.</p>
				<p>“It is perhaps as well she is gone,” she said.</p>
				<p>“Yes, ma’am,” the servant said eagerly; “and I am sure the Pastor thinks just the same. In any case he soon will. And the mistress will see that now there will be more peace in the house, and I am sure the master needs it.”</p>
				<p>“Oh!” said the Pastor’s wife, “I was obliged to be careful. There were always so many clothes to be got for her, that it was quite dreadful. He was so afraid that she should not get as much as the others that she sometimes even had more. And it cost so much, now that she was grown up.”</p>
				<p>“I suppose, ma’am, Greta will get her muslin dress?”</p>
				<p>“Yes; either Greta will have it, or I shall use it myself.”</p>
				<p>“She does not leave much behind her, poor thing!”</p>
				<p>“No one expects her to leave anything,” said her adopted mother. “I should be quite content if I could remember ever having had a kind word from her.”</p>
				<p>This is only the kind of thing one says when one has a bad conscience, and wants to excuse one’s self. Her adopted mother did not really mean what she said.</p>
				<p>The Dalar man behaved exactly as he always did when he came to sell his wares. He stood for a little while looking round the kitchen; then he slowly pushed the pack on to a table, and unfastened the braces and the straps; then he looked round to see if there were any cats or dogs about. He then straightened his back, and began to unfasten the two leather flaps, which were fastened with numerous buckles and knots.</p>
				<p>“He need not trouble about opening his pack today,” Lisa said; “it is Sunday, and he knows quite well we don’t buy anything on Sundays.”</p>
				<p>She, however, took no notice of the crazy fellow, who continued to unfasten his straps. She turned round to her mistress. This was a good opportunity for insinuating herself.</p>
				<p>“I don’t even know whether she was good to the children. I have often heard them cry in the nursery.”</p>
				<p>“I suppose it was the same with them as it was with their mother,” said the Pastor’s wife; “but now, of course, they cry because she is dead.”</p>
				<p>“They don’t understand what is best for them,” said the servant; “but the mistress can be certain that before a month is gone there will be no one to cry over her.”</p>
				<p>At the same moment they both turned round from the kitchen range, and looked towards the table, where the Dalar man stood opening his big pack. They had heard a strange noise, something like a sigh or a sob. The man was just opening the inside lid, and out of the pack rose the newly-buried girl, exactly the same as when they laid her in the coffin.</p>
				<p>And yet she did not look quite the same. She looked almost more dead now than when she was laid in her coffin. Then she had nearly the same colour as when she was alive; now her face was ashy-gray, there was a bluish-black shadow round her mouth, and her eyes lay deep in her head. She said nothing, but her face expressed the greatest despair, and she held out beseechingly, and as if to avert their anger, the bouquet of myrtle which she had received from her adopted mother.</p>
				<p>This sight was more than flesh and blood could stand. Her mother fell fainting to the ground; the maid stood still for a moment, gazing at the mother and daughter, covered her eyes with her hands, and rushed into her own room and locked the door.</p>
				<p>“It is not me she has come for; this does not concern me.”</p>
				<p>But Ingrid turned round to the Dalar man.</p>
				<p>“Put me in your pack again, and take me away. Do you hear? Take me away. Take me back to where you found me.”</p>
				<p>The Dalar man happened to look through the window. A long row of carts and carriages was coming up the avenue and into the yard. Ah, indeed! then he was not going to stay. He did not like that at all.</p>
				<p>Ingrid crouched down at the bottom of the pack. She said not another word, but only sobbed. The flaps and the lids were fastened, and she was again lifted on to his back and carried away. Those who were coming to the funeral feast laughed at the Goat, who hastened away, curtsying and curtsying to every horse he met.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-story-of-a-country-house-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>Anna Stina was an old woman who lived in the depths of the forest. She gave a helping hand at the Parsonage now and then, and always managed opportunely to come down the hillside when they were baking or washing. She was a nice, clever old woman, and she and Ingrid were good friends. As soon as the young girl was able to collect her thoughts, she made up her mind to take refuge with her.</p>
				<p>“Listen,” she said to the Dalar man. “When you get onto the high road, turn into the forest; then go straight on until you come to a gate; there you must turn to the left; then you must go straight on until you come to the large gravel-pit. From there you can see a house: take me there, and I will play to you.”</p>
				<p>The short and harsh manner in which she gave her orders jarred upon her ears, but she was obliged to speak in this way in order to be obeyed; it was the only chance she had. What right had she to order another person about⁠—she who had not even the right to be alive?</p>
				<p>After all this she would never again be able to feel as if she had any right to live. This was the most dreadful part of all that had happened to her: that she could have lived in the Parsonage for six years, and not even been able to make herself so much loved that they wished to keep her alive. And those whom no one loves have no right to live. She could not exactly say how she knew it was so, but it was as clear as daylight. She knew it from the feeling that the same moment she heard that they did not care about her an iron hand seemed to have crushed her heart as if to make it stop. Yes, it was life itself that had been closed for her. And the same moment she had come back from death, and felt the delight of being alive burn brightly and strongly within her, just at that moment the one thing that gave her the right of existing had been torn from her.</p>
				<p>This was worse than sentence of death. It was much more cruel than an ordinary sentence of death. She knew what it was like. It was like felling a tree⁠—not in the usual manner, when the trunk is cut through, but by cutting its roots and leaving it standing in the ground to die by itself. There the tree stands, and cannot understand why it no longer gets nourishment and support. It struggles and strives to live, but the leaves get smaller and smaller, it sends forth no fresh shoots, the bark falls off, and it must die, because it is severed from the spring of life. Thus it is it must die.</p>
				<p>At last the Dalar man put down his pack on the stone step outside a little house in the midst of the wild forest. The door was locked, but as soon as Ingrid had got out of the pack she took the key from under the doorstep, opened the door, and walked in.</p>
				<p>Ingrid knew the house thoroughly and all it contained. It was not the first time she had come there for comfort; it was not the first time she had come and told old Anna Stina that she could not bear living at home any longer⁠—that her adopted mother was so hard to her that she would not go back to the Parsonage. But every time she came the old woman had talked her over and quieted her. She had made her some terrible coffee from roasted peas and chicory, without a single coffee-bean in it, but which had all the same given her new courage, and in the end she had made her laugh at everything, and encouraged her so much, that she had simply danced down the hillside on her way home.</p>
				<p>Even if Anna Stina had been at home, and had made some of her terrible coffee, it would probably not have helped Ingrid this time. But the old woman was down at the Parsonage to the funeral feast, for the Pastor’s wife had not forgotten to invite any of those of whom Ingrid had been fond. That, too, was probably the result of an uneasy conscience.</p>
				<p>But in Anna’s room everything was as usual. And when Ingrid saw the sofa with the wooden seat, and the clean, scoured table, and the cat, and the coffee-kettle, although she did not feel comforted or cheered, she felt that here was a place where she could give vent to her sorrow. It was a relief that here she need not think of anything but crying and moaning.</p>
				<p>She went straight to the settle, threw herself on the wooden seat, and lay there crying, she did not know for how long.</p>
				<p>The Dalar man sat outside on the stone step; he did not want to go into the house on account of the cat. He expected that Ingrid would come out and play to him. He had taken the violin out long ago. As it was such a long time before she came, he began to play himself. He played softly and gently, as was his wont. It was barely possible for the young girl to hear him playing.</p>
				<p>Ingrid had one fit of shivering after the other. This was how she had been before she fell ill. She would no doubt be ill again. It was also best that the fever should come and put an end to her in earnest.</p>
				<p>When she heard the violin, she rose and looked round with bewildered glance. Who was that playing? Was that her student? Had he come at last? It soon struck her, however, that it was the Dalar man, and she lay down again with a sigh. She could not follow what he was playing. But as soon as she closed her eyes the violin assumed the student’s voice. She also heard what he said; he spoke with her adopted mother and defended her. He spoke just as nicely as he had done to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren. Ingrid needed love so much, he said. That was what she had missed. That was why she had not always attended to her work, but allowed dreams to fill her mind. But no one knew how she could work and slave for those who loved her. For their sake she could bear sorrow and sickness, and contempt and poverty; for them she would be as strong as a giant, and as patient as a slave.</p>
				<p>Ingrid heard him distinctly and she became quiet. Yes, it was true. If only her adopted mother had loved her, she would have seen what Ingrid was worth. But as she did not love her, Ingrid was paralyzed in her efforts. Yes, so it had been.</p>
				<p>Now the fever had left her, she only lay and listened to what the student said. She slept a little now and then; time after time she thought she was lying in her grave, and then it was always the student who came and took her out of the coffin. She lay and disputed with him.</p>
				<p>“When I am dreaming it is you who come,” she said.</p>
				<p>“It is always I who come to you, Ingrid,” he said. “I thought you knew that. I take you out of the grave; I carry you on my shoulders; I play you to sleep. It is always I.”</p>
				<p>What disturbed and awoke her was the thought that she had to get up and play for the Dalar man. Several times she rose up to do it, but could not. As soon as she fell back upon the settle she began to dream. She sat crouching in the pack and the student carried her through the forest. It was always he.</p>
				<p>“But it was not you,” she said to him.</p>
				<p>“Of course it was I,” he said, smiling at her contradicting him. “You have been thinking about me every day for all these years; so you can understand I could not help saving you when you were in such great danger.”</p>
				<p>Of course she saw the force of his argument; and then she began to realize that he was right, and that it was he. But this was such infinite bliss that she again awoke. Love seemed to fill her whole being. It could not have been more real had she seen and spoken with her beloved.</p>
				<p>“Why does he never come in real life?” she said, half aloud. “Why does he only come in my dreams?”</p>
				<p>She did not dare to move, for then love would fly away. It was as if a timid bird had settled on her shoulder, and she was afraid of frightening it away. If she moved, the bird would fly away, and sorrow would overcome her.</p>
				<p>When at last she really awoke, it was twilight. She must have slept the whole afternoon and evening. At that time of the year it was not dark until after ten o’clock. The violin had ceased playing, and the Dalar man had probably gone away.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina had not yet come back. She would probably be away the whole night. It did not matter to Ingrid; all she wanted was to lie down again and sleep. She was afraid of all the sorrow and despair that would overwhelm her as soon as she awoke. But then she got something new to think about. Who could have closed the door? who had spread Anna Stina’s great shawl over her? and who had placed a piece of dry bread beside her on the seat? Had he, the Goat, done all this for her? For a moment she thought she saw dream and reality standing side by side, trying which could best console her. And the dream stood joyous and smiling, showering over her all the bliss of love to comfort her. But life, poor, hard, and bitter though it was, also brought its kindly little mite to show that it did not mean to be so hard upon her as perhaps she thought.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-story-of-a-country-house-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>Ingrid and Anna Stina were walking through the dark forest. They had been walking for four days, and had slept three nights in the Säter huts. Ingrid was weak and weary; her face was transparently pale; her eyes were sunken, and shone feverishly. Old Anna Stina now and then secretly cast an anxious look at her, and prayed to God that He would sustain her so that she might not die by the wayside. Now and then the old woman could not help looking behind her with uneasiness. She had an uncomfortable feeling that the old man with his scythe came stealthily after them through the forest to reclaim the young girl who, both by the word of God and the casting of earth upon her, had been consecrated to him.</p>
				<p>Old Anna Stina was little and broad, with a large, square face, which was so intelligent that it was almost good-looking. She was not superstitious⁠—she lived quite alone in the midst of the forest without being afraid either of witches or evil spirits⁠—but as she walked there by the side of Ingrid she felt as distinctly as if someone had told her that she was walking beside a being who did not belong to this world. She had had that sensation ever since she had found Ingrid lying in her house that Monday morning.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina had not returned home on the Sunday evening, for down at the Parsonage the Pastor’s wife had been taken very ill, and Anna Stina, who was accustomed to nurse sick people, had stayed to sit up with her. The whole night she had heard the Pastor’s wife raving about Ingrid’s having appeared to her; but that the old woman had not believed. And when she returned home the next day and found Ingrid, the old woman would at once have gone down to the Parsonage again to tell them that it was not a ghost they had seen; but when she had suggested this to Ingrid, it had affected her so much that she dared not do it. It was as if the little life which burnt in her would be extinguished, just as the flame of a candle is put out by too strong a draught. She could have died as easily as a little bird in its cage. Death was prowling around her. There was nothing to be done but to nurse her very tenderly and deal very gently with her if her life was to be preserved.</p>
				<p>The old woman hardly knew what to think of Ingrid. Perhaps she was a ghost; there seemed to be so little life in her. She quite gave up trying to talk her to reason. There was nothing else for it but giving in to her wishes that no one should hear anything about her being alive. And then the old woman tried to arrange everything as wisely as possible. She had a sister who was housekeeper on a large estate in Dalarne, and she made up her mind to take Ingrid to her, and persuade her sister, Stafva, to give the girl a situation at the Manor House. Ingrid would have to be content with being simply a servant. There was nothing else for it.</p>
				<p>They were now on their way to the Manor House. Anna Stina knew the country so well that they were not obliged to go by the high road, but could follow the lonely forest paths. But they had also undergone much hardship. Their shoes were worn and in pieces, their skirts soiled and frayed at the bottom, and a branch had torn a long rent in Ingrid’s sleeve.</p>
				<p>On the evening of the fourth day they came to a hill from which they could look down into a deep valley. In the valley was a lake, and near the edge of the lake was a high, rocky island, upon which stood a large white building. When Anna Stina saw the house, she said it was called Munkhyttan, and that it was there her sister lived.</p>
				<p>They made themselves as tidy as they could on the hillside. They arranged the handkerchiefs which they wore on their heads, dried their shoes with moss, and washed themselves in a forest stream, and Anna Stina tried to make a fold in Ingrid’s sleeve so that the rent could not be seen.</p>
				<p>The old woman sighed when she looked at Ingrid, and quite lost courage. It was not only that she looked so strange in the clothes she had borrowed from Anna Stina, and which did not at all fit her, but her sister Stafva would never take her into her service, she looked so wretched and pitiful. It was like engaging a breath of wind. The girl could be of no more use than a sick butterfly.</p>
				<p>As soon as they were ready, they went down the hill to the lake. It was only a short distance. Then they came to the land belonging to the Manor House.</p>
				<p>Was that a country house?</p>
				<p>There were large neglected fields, upon which the forest encroached more and more. There was a bridge leading on to the island, so shaky that they hardly thought it would keep together until they were safely over. There was an avenue leading from the bridge to the main building, covered with grass, like a meadow, and a tree which had been blown down had been left lying across the road.</p>
				<p>The island was pretty enough, so pretty that a castle might very well have been built there. But nothing but weeds grew in the garden, and in the large park the trees were choking each other, and black snakes glided over the green, wet walks.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina felt uneasy when she saw how neglected everything was, and went along mumbling to herself: “What does all this mean? Is Stafva dead? How can she stand everything looking like this? Things were very different thirty years ago, when I was last here. What in the world can be the matter with Stafva?” She could not imagine that there could be such neglect in any place where Stafva lived.</p>
				<p>Ingrid walked behind her, slowly and reluctantly. The moment she put her foot on the bridge she felt that there were not two walking there, but three. Someone had come to meet her there, and had turned back to accompany her. Ingrid heard no footsteps, but he who accompanied them appeared indistinctly by her side. She could see there was someone.</p>
				<p>She became terribly afraid. She was just going to beg Anna Stina to turn back and tell her that everything seemed so strange here that she dare not go any further. But before she had time to say anything, the stranger came quite close to her, and she recognised him. Before, she only saw him indistinctly; now she saw him so clearly that she could see it was the student.</p>
				<p>It no longer seemed weird and ghostlike that he walked there. It was only strangely delightful that he came to receive her. It was as if it were he who had brought her there, and would, by coming to welcome her, show that it was.</p>
				<p>He walked with her over the bridge, through the avenue, quite up to the main building.</p>
				<p>She could not help turning her head every moment to the left. It was there she saw his face, quite close to her cheek. It was really not a face that she saw, only an unspeakably beautiful smile that drew tenderly near her. But if she turned her head quite round to see it properly, it was no longer there. No, there was nothing one could see distinctly. But as soon as she looked straight before her, it was there again, quite close to her.</p>
				<p>Her invisible companion did not speak to her, he only smiled. But that was enough for her. It was more than enough to show her that there was one in the world who kept near her with tender love.</p>
				<p>She felt his presence as something so real, that she firmly believed he protected her and watched over her. And before this happy consciousness vanished all the despair which her adopted mother’s hard words had called forth.</p>
				<p>Ingrid felt herself again given back to life. She had the right to live, as there was one who loved her.</p>
				<p>And this was why she entered the kitchen at Munkhyttan with a faint blush on her cheeks, and with radiant eyes, fragile, weak, and transparent, but sweet as a newly-opened rose.</p>
				<p>She still went about as if in a dream, and did not know much about where she was; but what surprised her so much that it nearly awakened her was to see a new Anna Stina standing by the fireplace. She stood there, little and broad, with a large, square face, exactly like the other. But why was she so fine, with a white cap with strings tied in a large bow under her chin, and with a black bombazine dress? Ingrid’s head was so confused, that it was some time before it occurred to her that this must be Miss Stafva.</p>
				<p>She felt that Anna Stina looked uneasily at her, and she tried to pull herself together and say “Good day.” But the only thing her mind could grasp was the thought that he had come to her.</p>
				<p>Inside the kitchen there was a small room, with blue-checked covering on the furniture. They were taken into that room, and Miss Stafva gave them coffee and something to eat.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina at once began to talk about their errand. She spoke for a long time; said that she knew her sister stood so high in her ladyship’s favour that she left it to her to engage the servants. Miss Stafva said nothing, but she gave a look at Ingrid as much as to say that it would hardly have been left with her if she had chosen servants like her.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina praised Ingrid, and said she was a good girl. She had hitherto served in a parsonage, but now that she was grown up she wanted really to learn something, and that was why Anna Stina had brought her to one who could teach her more than any other person she knew.</p>
				<p>Miss Stafva did not reply to this remark either. But her glance plainly showed that she was surprised that anyone who had had a situation in a parsonage had no clothes of her own, but was obliged to borrow old Anna Stina’s.</p>
				<p>Then old Anna Stina began to tell how she lived quite alone in the forest, deserted by all her relatives. And this young girl had come running up the hill many an evening and many an early morning to see her. She had therefore thought and hoped that she could now help her to get a good situation.</p>
				<p>Miss Stafva said it was a pity that they had gone such a long way to find a place. If she were a clever girl, she could surely get a situation in some good family in their own neighbourhood.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina could now clearly see that Ingrid’s prospects were not good, and therefore she began in a more solemn vein:</p>
				<p>“Here you have lived, Stafva, and had a good, comfortable home all your life, and I have had to fight my way in great poverty. But I have never asked you for anything before today. And now you will send me away like a beggar, to whom one gives a meal and nothing more.”</p>
				<p>Miss Stafva smiled a little; then she said:</p>
				<p>“Sister Anna Stina, you are not telling me the truth. I, too, come from Raglanda, and I should like to know at what peasant’s house in that parish grow such eyes and such a face.”</p>
				<p>And she pointed at Ingrid, and continued:</p>
				<p>“I can quite understand, Anna Stina, that you would like to help one who looks like that. But I do not understand how you can think that your sister Stafva has not more sense than to believe the stories you choose to tell her.”</p>
				<p>Anna Stina was so frightened that she could not say a word, but Ingrid made up her mind to confide in Miss Stafva, and began at once to tell her whole story in her soft, beautiful voice.</p>
				<p>And Ingrid had hardly told of how she had been lying in the grave, and that a Dalar man had come and saved her, before old Miss Stafva grew red and quickly bent down to hide it. It was only a second, but there must have been some cause for it, for from that moment she looked so kind.</p>
				<p>She soon began to ask full particulars about it; more especially she wanted to know about the crazy man, whether Ingrid had not been afraid of him. Oh no, he did no harm. He was not mad, Ingrid said; he could both buy and sell. He was only frightened of some things.</p>
				<p>Ingrid thought the hardest of all was to tell what she had heard her adopted mother say. But she told everything, although there were tears in her voice.</p>
				<p>Then Miss Stafva went up to her, drew back the handkerchief from her head, and looked into her eyes. Then she patted her lightly on the cheek.</p>
				<p>“Never mind that, little miss,” she said. “There is no need for me to know about that. Now sister and Miss Ingrid must excuse me,” she said soon after, “but I must take up her ladyship’s coffee. I shall soon be down again, and you can tell me more.”</p>
				<p>When she returned, she said she had told her ladyship about the young girl who had lain in the grave, and now her mistress wanted to see her.</p>
				<p>They were taken upstairs, and shown into her ladyship’s boudoir.</p>
				<p>Anna Stina remained standing at the door of the fine room. But Ingrid was not shy; she went straight up to the old lady and put out her hand. She had often been shy with others who looked much less aristocratic; but here, in this house, she did not feel embarrassed. She only felt so wonderfully happy that she had come there.</p>
				<p>“So it is you, my child, who have been buried,” said her ladyship, nodding friendlily to her. “Do you mind telling me your story, my child? I sit here quite alone, and never hear anything, you know.”</p>
				<p>Then Ingrid began again to tell her story. But she had not got very far before she was interrupted. Her ladyship did exactly the same as Miss Stafva had done. She rose, pushed the handkerchief back from Ingrid’s forehead and looked into her eyes.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” her ladyship said to herself, “that I can understand. I can understand that he must obey those eyes.”</p>
				<p>For the first time in her life Ingrid was praised for her courage. Her ladyship thought she had been very brave to place herself in the hands of a crazy fellow.</p>
				<p>She <em>was</em> afraid, she said, but she was still more afraid of people seeing her in that state. And he did no harm; he was almost quite right, and then he was so good.</p>
				<p>Her ladyship wanted to know his name, but Ingrid did not know it. She had never heard of any other name but the Goat. Her ladyship asked several times how he managed when he came to do business. Had she not laughed at him, and did she not think that he looked terrible⁠—the Goat? It sounded so strange when her ladyship said “the Goat.” There was so much bitterness in her voice when she said it, and yet she said it over and over again.</p>
				<p>No; Ingrid did not think so, and she never laughed at unfortunate people. The old lady looked more gentle than her words sounded.</p>
				<p>“It appears you know how to manage mad people, my child,” she said. “That is a great gift. Most people are afraid of such poor creatures.” She listened to all Ingrid had to say, and sat meditating. “As you have not any home, my child,” she said, “will you not stay here with me? You see, I am an old woman living here by myself, and you can keep me company, and I shall take care that you have everything you want. What do you say to it, my child? There will come a time, I suppose,” continued her ladyship, “when we shall have to inform your parents that you are still living; but for the present everything shall remain as it is, so that you can have time to rest both body and mind. And you shall call me ‘Aunt’; but what shall I call you?”</p>
				<p>“Ingrid⁠—Ingrid Berg.”</p>
				<p>“Ingrid,” said her ladyship thoughtfully. “I would rather have called you something else. As soon as you entered the room with those starlike eyes, I thought you ought to be called Mignon.”</p>
				<p>When it dawned upon the young girl that here she would really find a home, she felt more sure than ever that she had been brought here in some supernatural manner, and she whispered her thanks to her invisible protector before she thanked her ladyship, Miss Stafva, and Anna Stina.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Ingrid slept in a four-poster, on luxurious featherbeds three feet high, and had hemstitched sheets, and silken quilts embroidered with Swedish crowns and French lilies. The bed was so broad that she could lie as she liked either way, and so high that she must mount two steps to get into it. At the top sat a Cupid holding the brightly-coloured hangings, and on the posts sat other Cupids, which held them up in festoons.</p>
				<p>In the same room where the bed stood was an old curved chest of drawers inlaid with olive-wood, and from it Ingrid might take as much sweetly-scented linen as she liked. There was also a wardrobe containing many gay and pretty silk and muslin gowns that only hung there and waited until it pleased her to put them on.</p>
				<p>When she awoke in the morning there stood by her bedside a tray with a silver coffee-set and old Indian china. And every morning she set her small white teeth in fine white bread and delicious almond-cakes; every day she was dressed in a fine muslin gown with a lace fichu. Her hair was dressed high at the back, but round her forehead there was a row of little light curls.</p>
				<p>On the wall between the windows hung a mirror, with a narrow glass in a broad frame, where she could see herself, and nod to her picture, and ask:</p>
				<p>“Is it you? Is it really you? How have you come here?”</p>
				<p>In the daytime, when Ingrid had left the chamber with the four-poster, she sat in the drawing-room and embroidered or painted on silk, and when she was tired of that, she played a little on the guitar and sang, or talked with the old lady, who taught her French, and amused herself by training her to be a fine lady.</p>
				<p>But she had come to an enchanted castle⁠—she could not get away from that idea. She had had that feeling the first moment, and it was always coming back again. No one arrived at the house, no one left it. In this big house only two or three rooms were kept in order; in the others no one ever went. No one walked in the garden, no one looked after it. There was only one manservant, and an old man who cut the firewood. And Miss Stafva had only two servants, who helped her in the kitchen and in the dairy.</p>
				<p>But there was always dainty food on the table, and her ladyship and Ingrid were always waited upon and dressed like fine ladies of rank.</p>
				<p>If nothing thrived on the old estate, there was, at any rate, fertile soil for dreams, and even if they did not nurse and cultivate flowers there, Ingrid was not the one to neglect her dream-roses. They grew up around her whenever she was alone. It seemed to her then as if red dream-roses formed a canopy over her.</p>
				<p>Round the island where the trees bent low over the water, and sent long branches in between the reeds, and where shrubs and lofty trees grew luxuriantly, was a pathway where Ingrid often walked. It looked so strange to see so many letters carved on the trees, to see the old seats and summerhouses; to see the old tumble-down pavilions, which were so worm-eaten that she dared not go into them; to think that real people had walked here, that here they had lived, and longed, and loved, and that this had not always been an enchanted castle.</p>
				<p>Down here she felt even more the witchery of the place. Here the face with the smile came to her. Here she could thank him, the student, because he had brought her to a home where she was so happy, where they loved her, and made her forget how hardly others had treated her. If it had not been he who had arranged all this for her, she could not possibly have been allowed to remain here; it was quite impossible.</p>
				<p>She knew that it must be he. She had never before had such wild fancies. She had always been thinking of him, but she had never felt that he was so near her that he took care of her. The only thing she longed for was that he himself should come, for of course he would come some day. It was impossible that he should not come. In these avenues he had left behind part of his soul.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Summer went, and autumn; Christmas was drawing near.</p>
				<p>“Miss Ingrid,” said the old housekeeper one day, in a rather mysterious manner, “I think I ought to tell you that the young master who owns Munkhyttan is coming home for Christmas. In any case, he generally comes,” she added, with a sigh.</p>
				<p>“And her ladyship, who has never even mentioned that she has a son,” said Ingrid.</p>
				<p>But she was not really surprised. She might just as well have answered that she had known it all along.</p>
				<p>“No one has spoken to you about him, Miss Ingrid,” said the housekeeper, “for her ladyship has forbidden us to speak about him.”</p>
				<p>And then Miss Stafva would not say any more.</p>
				<p>Neither did Ingrid want to ask any more. Now she was afraid of hearing something definite. She had raised her expectations so high that she was herself afraid they would fail. The truth might be well worth hearing, but it might also be bitter, and destroy all her beautiful dreams. But from that day he was with her night and day. She had hardly time to speak to others. She must always be with him.</p>
				<p>One day she saw that they had cleared the snow away from the avenue. She grew almost frightened. Was he coming now?</p>
				<p>The next day her ladyship sat from early morning in the window looking down the avenue. Ingrid had gone further into the room. She was so restless that she could not remain at the window.</p>
				<p>“Do you know whom I am expecting today, Ingrid?”</p>
				<p>The young girl nodded; she dared not depend upon her voice to answer.</p>
				<p>“Has Miss Stafva told you that my son is peculiar?”</p>
				<p>Ingrid shook her head.</p>
				<p>“He is very peculiar⁠—he⁠—I cannot speak about it. I cannot⁠—you must see for yourself.”</p>
				<p>It sounded heartrending. Ingrid grew very uneasy. What was there with this house that made everything so strange? Was it something terrible that she did not know about? Was her ladyship not on good terms with her son? What was it, what was it?</p>
				<p>The one moment in an ecstasy of joy, the next in a fever of uncertainty, she was obliged to call forth the long row of visions in order again to feel that it must be he who came. She could not at all say why she so firmly believed that he must be the son just of this house. He might, for the matter of that, be quite another person. Oh, how hard it was that she had never heard his name!</p>
				<p>It was a long day. They sat waiting in silence until evening came.</p>
				<p>The man came driving a cartload of Christmas logs, and the horse remained in the yard whilst the wood was unloaded.</p>
				<p>“Ingrid,” said her ladyship in a commanding and hasty tone, “run down to Anders and tell him that he must be quick and get the horse into the stable. Quick⁠—quick!”</p>
				<p>Ingrid ran down the stairs and on to the veranda; but when she came out she forgot to call to the man. Just behind the cart she saw a tall man in a sheepskin coat, and with a large pack on his back. It was not necessary for her to see him standing curtsying and curtsying to recognise him. But, but⁠—She put her hand to her head and drew a deep breath. How would all these things ever become clear to her? Was it for that fellow’s sake her ladyship had sent her down? And the man, why did he pull the horse away in such great haste? And why did he take off his cap and salute? What had that crazy man to do with the people of this house?</p>
				<p>All at once the truth flashed upon Ingrid so crushingly and overwhelmingly that she could have screamed. It was not her beloved who had watched over her; it was this crazy man. She had been allowed to remain here because she had spoken kindly of him, because his mother wanted to carry on the good work which he had commenced.</p>
				<p>The Goat⁠—that was the young master.</p>
				<p>But to her no one came. No one had brought her here; no one had expected her. It was all dreams, fancies, illusions! Oh, how hard it was! If she had only never expected him!</p>
				<p>But at night, when Ingrid lay in the big bed with the brightly-coloured hangings, she dreamt over and over again that she saw the student come home. “It was not you who came,” she said. “Yes, of course it was I,” he replied. And in her dreams she believed him.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>One day, the week after Christmas, Ingrid sat at the window in the boudoir embroidering. Her ladyship sat on the sofa knitting, as she always did now. There was silence in the room.</p>
				<p>Young Hede had been at home for a week. During all that time Ingrid had never seen him. In his home, too, he lived like a peasant, slept in the menservants’ quarters, and had his meals in the kitchen. He never went to see his mother.</p>
				<p>Ingrid knew that both her ladyship and Miss Stafva expected that she should do something for Hede, that at the least she would try and persuade him to remain at home. And it grieved her that it was impossible for her to do what they wished. She was in despair about herself and about the utter weakness that had come over her since her expectations had been so shattered.</p>
				<p>Today Miss Stafva had just come in to say that Hede was getting his pack ready to start. He was not even staying as long as he generally did at Christmas, she said with a reproachful look at Ingrid.</p>
				<p>Ingrid understood all they had expected from her, but she could do nothing. She sewed and sewed without saying anything.</p>
				<p>Miss Stafva went away, and there was again silence in the room. Ingrid quite forgot that she was not alone; a feeling of drowsiness suddenly came over her, whilst all her sad thoughts wove themselves into a strange fancy.</p>
				<p>She thought she was walking up and down the whole of the large house. She went through a number of rooms and salons; she saw them before her with gray covers over the furniture. The paintings and the chandeliers were covered with gauze, and on the floors was a layer of thick dust, which whirled about when she went through the rooms. But at last she came to a room where she had never been before; it was quite a small chamber, where both walls and ceiling were black. But when she came to look more closely at them, she saw that the chamber was neither painted black, nor covered with black material, but it was so dark on account of the walls and the ceiling being completely covered with bats. The whole room was nothing but a huge nest for bats. In one of the windows a pane was broken, so one could understand how the bats had got in in such incredible numbers that they covered the whole room. They hung there in their undisturbed winter sleep; not one moved when she entered. But she was seized by such terror at this sight that she began to shiver and shake all over. It was dreadful to see the quantity of bats she so distinctly saw hanging there. They all had black wings wrapped around them like cloaks; they all hung from the walls by a single long claw in undisturbable sleep. She saw it all so distinctly that she wondered if Miss Stafva knew that the bats had taken possession of a whole room. In her thoughts she then went to Miss Stafva and asked her whether she had been into that room and seen all the bats.</p>
				<p>“Of course I have seen them,” said Miss Stafva. “It is their own room. I suppose you know, Miss Ingrid, that there is not a single old country house in all Sweden where they have not to give up a room to the bats?”</p>
				<p>“I have never heard that before,” Ingrid said.</p>
				<p>“When you have lived as long in the world as I have, Miss Ingrid, you will find out that I am speaking the truth,” said Miss Stafva.</p>
				<p>“I cannot understand that people will put up with such a thing,” Ingrid said.</p>
				<p>“We are obliged to,” said Miss Stafva. “Those bats are Mistress Sorrow’s birds, and she has commanded us to receive them.”</p>
				<p>Ingrid saw that Miss Stafva did not wish to say anything more about that matter, and she began to sew again; but she could not help speculating over who that Mistress Sorrow could be who had so much power here that she could compel Miss Stafva to give up a whole room to the bats.</p>
				<p>Just as she was thinking about all this, she saw a black sledge, drawn by black horses, pull up outside the veranda. She saw Miss Stafva come out and make a low curtsy. An old lady in a long black velvet cloak, with many small capes on the shoulders, alighted from the sledge. She was bent, and had difficulty in walking. She could hardly lift her feet sufficiently to walk up the steps.</p>
				<p>“Ingrid,” said her ladyship, looking up from her knitting, “I think I heard Mistress Sorrow arrive. It must have been her jingle I heard. Have you noticed that she never has sledge-bells on her horses, but only quite a small jingle? But one can hear it⁠—one can hear it! Go down into the hall, Ingrid, and bid Mistress Sorrow welcome.”</p>
				<p>When Ingrid came down into the front hall, Mistress Sorrow stood talking with Miss Stafva on the veranda. They did not notice her.</p>
				<p>Ingrid saw with surprise that the round-backed old lady had something hidden under all her capes which looked like crape; it was put well up and carefully hidden. Ingrid had to look very closely before she discovered that they were two large bat’s wings which she tried to hide. The young girl grew still more curious and tried to see her face, but she stood and looked into the yard, so it was impossible. So much, however, Ingrid did see when she put out her hand to the housekeeper⁠—that one of her fingers was much longer than the others, and at the end of it was a large, crooked claw.</p>
				<p>“I suppose everything is as usual here?” she said.</p>
				<p>“Yes, honoured Mistress Sorrow,” said Miss Stafva.</p>
				<p>“You have not planted any flowers, nor pruned any trees? You have not mended the bridge, nor weeded the avenue?”</p>
				<p>“No, honoured mistress.”</p>
				<p>“This is quite as it should be,” said the honoured mistress. “I suppose you have not had the audacity to search for the vein of ore, or to cut down the forest which is encroaching on the fields?”</p>
				<p>“No, honoured mistress.”</p>
				<p>“Or to clean the wells?”</p>
				<p>“No, nor to clean the wells.”</p>
				<p>“This is a nice place,” said Mistress Sorrow; “I always like being here. In a few years things will be in such a state that my birds can live all over the house. You are really very good to my birds, Miss Stafva.”</p>
				<p>At this praise the housekeeper made a deep curtsy.</p>
				<p>“How are things otherwise at the house?” said Mistress Sorrow. “What sort of a Christmas have you had?”</p>
				<p>“We have kept Christmas as we always do,” said Miss Stafva. “Her ladyship sits knitting in her room day after day, thinks of nothing but her son, and does not even know that it is a festival. Christmas Eve we allowed to pass like any other day⁠—no presents and no candles.”</p>
				<p>“No Christmas tree, no Christmas fare?”</p>
				<p>“Nor any going to church; not so much as a candle in the windows on Christmas morning.”</p>
				<p>“Why should her ladyship honour God’s Son when God will not heal her son?” said Mistress Sorrow.</p>
				<p>“No, why should she?”</p>
				<p>“He is at home at present, I suppose? Perhaps he is better now?”</p>
				<p>“No, he is no better. He is as much afraid of things as ever.”</p>
				<p>“Does he still behave like a peasant? Does he never go into the rooms?”</p>
				<p>“We cannot get him to go into the rooms; he is afraid of her ladyship, as the honoured mistress knows.”</p>
				<p>“He has his meals in the kitchen, and sleeps in the menservants’ room?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, he does.”</p>
				<p>“And you have no idea how to cure him?”</p>
				<p>“We know nothing, we understand nothing.”</p>
				<p>Mistress Sorrow was silent for a moment; when she spoke again there was a hard, sharp ring in her voice:</p>
				<p>“This is all right as far as it goes, Miss Stafva; but I am not quite satisfied with you, all the same.”</p>
				<p>The same moment she turned round and looked sharply at Ingrid.</p>
				<p>Ingrid shuddered. Mistress Sorrow had a little, wrinkled face, the under part of which was so doubled up that one could hardly see the lower jaw. She had teeth like a saw, and thick hair on the upper lip. Her eyebrows were one single tuft of hair, and her skin was quite brown.</p>
				<p>Ingrid thought Miss Stafva could not see what she saw: Mistress Sorrow was not a human being; she was only an animal.</p>
				<p>Mistress Sorrow opened her mouth and showed her glittering teeth when she looked at Ingrid.</p>
				<p>“When this girl came here,” she said to Miss Stafva, “you thought she had been sent by God. You thought you could see from her eyes that she had been sent by Our Lord to save him. She knew how to manage mad people. Well, how has it worked?”</p>
				<p>“It has not worked at all. She has not done anything.”</p>
				<p>“No, I have seen to that,” said Mistress Sorrow. “It was my doing that you did not tell her why she was allowed to stay here. Had she known that, she would not have indulged in such rosy dreams about seeing her beloved. If she had not had such expectations, she would not have had such a bitter disappointment. Had disappointment not paralyzed her, she could perhaps have done something for this mad fellow. But now she has not even been to see him. She hates him because he is not the one she expected him to be. That is my doing, Miss Stafva, my doing.”</p>
				<p>“Yes; the honoured mistress knows her business,” said Miss Stafva.</p>
				<p>Mistress Sorrow took her lace handkerchief and dried her red-rimmed eyes. It looked as if it were meant for an expression of joy.</p>
				<p>“You need not make yourself out to be any better than you are, Miss Stafva,” she said. “I know you do not like my having taken that room for my birds. You do not like the thought of my having the whole house soon. I know that. You and your mistress had intended to cheat me. But it is all over now.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said Miss Stafva, “the honoured mistress can be quite easy. It is all over. The young master is leaving today. He has packed up his pack, and then we always know he is about to leave. Everything her ladyship and I have been dreaming about the whole autumn is over. Nothing has been done. We thought she might at least have persuaded him to remain at home, but in spite of all we have done for her, she has not done anything for us.”</p>
				<p>“No, she has only been a poor help, I know that,” said Mistress Sorrow. “But, all the same, she must be sent away now. That was really what I wanted to see her ladyship about.”</p>
				<p>Mistress Sorrow began to drag herself up the steps on her tottering legs. At every step she raised her wings a little, as if they should help her. She would, no doubt, much rather have flown.</p>
				<p>Ingrid went behind her. She felt strangely attracted and fascinated. If Mistress Sorrow had been the most beautiful woman in the world, she could not have felt a greater inclination to follow her.</p>
				<p>When she went into the boudoir she saw Mistress Sorrow sitting on the sofa by the side of her ladyship, whispering confidentially with her, as if they were old friends.</p>
				<p>“You must be able to see that you cannot keep her with you,” said Mistress Sorrow impressively. “You, who cannot bear to see a flower growing in your garden, can surely not stand having a young girl about in the house. It always brings a certain amount of brightness and life, and that would not suit you.”</p>
				<p>“No; that is just what I have been sitting and thinking about.”</p>
				<p>“Get her a situation as lady’s companion somewhere or other, but don’t keep her here.”</p>
				<p>She rose to say goodbye.</p>
				<p>“That was all I wanted to see you about,” she said. “But how are you yourself?”</p>
				<p>“Knives and scissors cut my heart all day long,” said her ladyship. “I only live in him as long as he is at home. It is worse than usual, much worse this time. I cannot bear it much longer.”⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Ingrid started; it was her ladyship’s bell that rang. She had been dreaming so vividly that she was quite surprised to see that her ladyship was alone, and that the black sledge was not waiting before the door.</p>
				<p>Her ladyship had rung for Miss Stafva, but she did not come. She asked Ingrid to go down to her room and call her.</p>
				<p>Ingrid went, but the little blue-checked room was empty. The young girl was going into the kitchen to ask for the housekeeper, but before she had time to open the door she heard Hede talking. She stopped outside; she could not persuade herself to go in and see him.</p>
				<p>She tried, however, to argue with herself. It was not his fault that he was not the one she had been expecting. She must try to do something for him; she must persuade him to remain at home. Before, she had not had such a feeling against him. He was not so very bad.</p>
				<p>She bent down and peeped through the keyhole. It was the same here as at other places. The servants tried to lead him on in order to amuse themselves by his strange talk. They asked him whom he was going to marry. Hede smiled; he liked to be asked about that kind of thing.</p>
				<p>“She is called Grave-Lily⁠—don’t you know that?” he said.</p>
				<p>The servant said she did not know that she had such a fine name.</p>
				<p>“But where does she live?”</p>
				<p>“Neither has she home nor has she farm,” Hede said. “She lives in my pack.”</p>
				<p>The servant said that was a queer home, and asked about her parents.</p>
				<p>“Neither has she father nor has she mother,” Hede said. “She is as fine as a flower; she has grown up in a garden.”</p>
				<p>He said all this with a certain amount of clearness, but when he wanted to describe how beautiful his sweetheart was he could not get on at all. He said a number of words, but they were strangely mixed together. One could not follow his thoughts, but evidently he himself derived much pleasure from what he said. He sat smiling and happy.</p>
				<p>Ingrid hurried away. She could not bear it any longer. She could not do anything for him. She was afraid of him. She disliked him. But she had not got further than the stairs before her conscience pricked her. Here she had received so much kindness, and she would not make any return.</p>
				<p>In order to master her dislike she tried in her own mind to think of Hede as a gentleman. She wondered how he had looked when he wore good clothes, and had his hair brushed back. She closed her eyes for a moment and thought. No, it was impossible, she could not imagine him as being any different from what he was. The same moment she saw the outlines of a beloved face by her side. It appeared at her left side wonderfully distinct. This time the face did not smile. The lips trembled as if in pain, and unspeakable suffering was written in sharp lines round the mouth.</p>
				<p>Ingrid stopped halfway up the stairs and looked at it. There it was, light and fleeting, as impossible to grasp and hold fast as a sunspot reflected by the prism of a chandelier, but just as visible, just as real. She thought of her recent dream, but this was different⁠—this was reality.</p>
				<p>When she had looked a little at the face, the lips began to move; they spoke, but she could not hear a sound. Then she tried to see what they said, tried to read the words from the lips, as deaf people do, and she succeeded.</p>
				<p>“Do not let me go,” the lips said; “do not let me go.”</p>
				<p>And the anguish with which it was said! If a fellow-creature had been lying at her feet begging for life, it could not have affected her more. She was so overcome that she shook. It was more heartrending than anything she had ever heard in her whole life. Never had she thought that anyone could beg in such fearful anguish. Again and again the lips begged, “Do not let me go!” And for every time the anguish was greater.</p>
				<p>Ingrid did not understand it, but remained standing, filled with unspeakable pity. It seemed to her that more than life itself must be at stake for one who begged like this, that his very soul must be at stake.</p>
				<p>The lips did not move any more; they stood half open in dull despair. When they assumed this expression she uttered a cry and stumbled. She recognised the face of the crazy fellow as she had just seen it.</p>
				<p>“No, no, no!” she said. “It cannot be so! It must not! it cannot! It is not possible that it is he!”</p>
				<p>The same moment the face vanished. She must have sat for a whole hour on the cold staircase, crying in helpless despair. But at last hope sprang up in her, strong and fair. She again took courage to raise her head. All that had happened seemed to show that she should save him. It was for that she had come here. She should have the great, great happiness of saving him.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>In the little boudoir her ladyship was talking to Miss Stafva. It sounded so pitiful to hear her asking the housekeeper to persuade her son to remain a few days longer. Miss Stafva tried to appear hard and severe.</p>
				<p>“Of course, I can ask him,” she said; “but your ladyship knows that no one can make him stay longer than he wants.”</p>
				<p>“We have money enough, you know. There is not the slightest necessity for him to go. Can you not tell him that?” said her ladyship.</p>
				<p>At the same moment Ingrid came in. The door opened noiselessly. She glided through the room with light, airy steps; her eyes were radiant, as if she beheld something beautiful afar off.</p>
				<p>When her ladyship saw her she frowned a little. She also felt an inclination to be cruel, to give pain.</p>
				<p>“Ingrid,” she said, “come here; I must speak with you about your future.”</p>
				<p>The young girl had fetched her guitar and was about to leave the room. She turned round to her ladyship.</p>
				<p>“My future?” she said, putting her hand to her forehead. “My future is already decided, you know,” she continued, with the smile of a martyr; and without saying any more she left the room.</p>
				<p>Her ladyship and Stafva looked in surprise at each other. They began to discuss where they should send the young girl. But when Miss Stafva came down to her room she found Ingrid sitting there, singing some little songs and playing on the guitar, and Hede sat opposite her, listening, his face all sunshine.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Ever since Ingrid had recognised the student in the poor crazy fellow, she had no other thought but that of trying to cure him; but this was a difficult task, and she had no idea whatever as to how she should set about it. To begin with, she only thought of how she could persuade him to remain at Munkhyttan; and this was easy enough. Only for the sake of hearing her play the violin or the guitar a little every day he would now sit patiently from morning till evening in Miss Stafva’s room waiting for her.</p>
				<p>She thought it would be a great thing if she could get him to go into the other rooms, but that she could not. She tried keeping in her room, and said she would not play any more for him if he did not come to her. But after she had remained there two days, he began to pack up his pack to go away, and then she was obliged to give in.</p>
				<p>He showed great preference for her, and distinctly showed that he liked her better than others; but she did not make him less frightened. She begged him to leave off his sheepskin coat, and wear an ordinary coat. He consented at once, but the next day he had it on again. Then she hid it from him; but he then appeared in the manservant’s skin coat. So then they would rather let him keep his own. He was still as frightened as ever, and took great care no one came too near him. Even Ingrid was not allowed to sit quite close to him.</p>
				<p>One day she said to him that now he must promise her something: he must give over curtsying to the cat. She would not ask him to do anything so difficult as give up curtsying to horses and dogs, but surely he could not be afraid of a little cat.</p>
				<p>Yes, he said; the cat was a goat.</p>
				<p>“It can’t be a goat,” she said; “it has no horns, you know.”</p>
				<p>He was pleased to hear that. It seemed as if at last he had found something by which he could distinguish a goat from other animals.</p>
				<p>The next day he met Miss Stafva’s cat.</p>
				<p>“That goat has no horns,” he said; and laughed quite proudly.</p>
				<p>He went past it, and sat down on the sofa to listen to Ingrid playing. But after he had sat a little while he grew restless, and he rose, went up to the cat, and curtsied.</p>
				<p>Ingrid was in despair. She took him by his arm and shook him. He ran straight out of the room, and did not appear until the next day.</p>
				<p>“Child, child,” said her ladyship, “you do exactly as I did; you try the same as I did. It will end by your frightening him so that he dare not see you any more. It is better to leave him in peace. We are satisfied with things as they are if he will only remain at home.”</p>
				<p>There was nothing else for Ingrid to do but wring her hands in sorrow that such a fine, lovable fellow should be concealed in this crazy man.</p>
				<p>Ingrid thought again and again, had she really only come here to play her grandfather’s tunes to him? Should they go on like that all through life? Would it never be otherwise?</p>
				<p>She also told him many stories, and in the midst of a story his face would lighten up, and he would say something wonderfully subtle and beautiful. A sane person would never have thought of anything like it. And no more was needed to make her courage rise, and then she began again with these endless experiments.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>It was late one afternoon, and the moon was just about to rise. White snow lay on the ground, and bright gray ice covered the lake. The trees were blackish-brown, and the sky was a flaming red after the sunset.</p>
				<p>Ingrid was on her way to the lake to skate. She went along a narrow path where the snow was quite trodden down. Gunnar Hede went behind her. There was something cowed in his bearing that made one think of a dog following its master.</p>
				<p>Ingrid looked tired; there was no brightness in her eyes, and her complexion was gray.</p>
				<p>As she walked along she wondered whether the day, which was now so nearly over, was content with itself⁠—if it were from joy it had lighted the great flaming red sunset far away in the west.</p>
				<p>She knew she could light no bonfire over this day, nor over any other day. In the whole month that had passed since she recognised Gunnar Hede she had gained nothing.</p>
				<p>And today a great fear had come upon her. It seemed to her as if she might perhaps lose her love over all this. She was nearly forgetting the student, only for thinking of the poor fellow. All that was bright and beautiful and youthful vanished from her love. Nothing was left but dull, heavy earnest.</p>
				<p>She was quite in despair as she walked towards the lake. She felt she did not know what ought to be done⁠—felt that she must give it all up. Oh, God, to have him walking behind her apparently strong and hale, and yet so helplessly, incurably sick!</p>
				<p>They had reached the lake, and she was putting on her skates. She also wanted him to skate, and helped him to put on his skates; but he fell as soon as he got on to the ice. He scrambled to the bank and sat down on a stone, and she skated away from him.</p>
				<p>Just opposite the stone upon which Gunnar Hede was sitting was an islet overgrown with birches and poplars, and behind it the radiant evening sky, which was still flaming red. And the fine, light, leafless tops of the trees stood against the glorious sky with such beauty that it was impossible not to notice it.</p>
				<p>Is it not a fact that one always recognises a place by a single feature? One does not exactly know how even the most familiar spot looks from all sides. And Munkhyttan one always knew by the little islet. If one had not seen the place for many years, one would know it again by this islet, where the dark treetops were lifted towards the sunset.</p>
				<p>Hede sat quite still, and looked at the islet and at the branches of the trees and at the gray ice which surrounded it.</p>
				<p>This was the view he knew best of all; there was nothing on the whole estate he knew so well, for it was always this islet that attracted the eye. And soon he was sitting looking at the islet without thinking about it, just as one does with things one knows so well. He sat for a long time gazing. Nothing disturbed him, not a human being, not a gust of wind, no strange object. He could not see Ingrid; she had skated far away on the ice.</p>
				<p>A rest and peace fell upon Gunnar Hede such as one only feels in home surroundings. Security and peace came to him from the little islet; it quieted the everlasting unrest that tormented him.</p>
				<p>Hede always imagined he was amongst enemies, and always thought of defending himself. For many years he had not felt that peace which made it possible for him to forget himself. But now it came upon him.</p>
				<p>Whilst Gunnar Hede was sitting thus and not thinking of anything, he happened mechanically to make a movement as one may do when one finds one’s self in accustomed circumstances. As he sat there with the shining ice before him and with skates on his feet, he got up and skated on to the lake, and he thought as little of what he was doing as one thinks of how one is holding fork or spoon when eating.</p>
				<p>He glided over the ice; it was glorious skating. He was a long way off the shore before he realized what he was doing.</p>
				<p>“Splendid ice!” he thought. “I wonder why I did not come down earlier in the day. It is a good thing I was more here yesterday,” he said. “I will really not waste a single day during the rest of my vacation.”</p>
				<p>No doubt it was because Gunnar Hede happened to do something he was in the habit of doing before he was ill that his old self awakened within him.</p>
				<p>Thoughts and associations connected with his former life began to force themselves upon his consciousness, and at the same time all the thoughts connected with his illness sank into oblivion.</p>
				<p>It had been his habit when skating to take a wide turn on the lake in order to see beyond a certain point. He did so now without thinking, but when he had turned the point he knew he had skated there to see if there was a light in his mother’s window.</p>
				<p>“She thinks it is time I was coming home, but she must wait a little; the ice is too good.”</p>
				<p>But it was mostly vague sensations of pleasure over the exercise and the beautiful evening that were awakened within him. A moonlight evening like this was just the time for skating; he was so fond of this peaceful transition from day to night. It was still light, but the stillness of night was already there, the best both of day and of night.</p>
				<p>There was another skater on the ice; it was a young girl. He was not sure if he knew her, but he skated towards her to find out. No; it was no one he knew, but he could not help making a remark when he passed her about the splendid ice.</p>
				<p>The stranger was probably a young girl from the town. She was evidently not accustomed to be addressed in this unceremonious manner; she looked quite frightened when he spoke to her. He certainly was queerly dressed; he was dressed quite like a peasant.</p>
				<p>Well, he did not want to frighten her away. He turned off and skated further up the lake; the ice was big enough for them both.</p>
				<p>But Ingrid had nearly screamed with astonishment. He had come towards her skating elegantly, with his arms crossed, the brim of his hat turned up, and his hair thrown back, so that it did not fall over his ears.</p>
				<p>He had spoken with the voice of a gentleman, almost without the slightest Dalar accent. She did not stop to think about it. She skated quickly towards the shore. She came breathless into the kitchen. She did not know how to say it shortly and quickly enough.</p>
				<p>“Miss Stafva, the young master has come home!”</p>
				<p>The kitchen was empty; neither the housekeeper nor the servants were there. Nor was there anybody in the housekeeper’s room. Ingrid rushed through the whole house, went into rooms where no one ever went. The whole time she cried out, “Miss Stafva, Miss Stafva! the young master has come home!”</p>
				<p>She was quite beside herself, and went on calling out, even when she stood on the landing upstairs, surrounded by the servants, Miss Stafva, and her ladyship herself. She said it over and over again. She was too much excited to stop. They all understood what she meant. They stood there quite as much overcome as she was.</p>
				<p>Ingrid turned restlessly from the one to the other. She ought to give explanations and orders, but about what? That she could so lose her presence of mind! She looked wildly questioning at her ladyship.</p>
				<p>“What was it I wanted?”</p>
				<p>The old lady gave some orders in a low, trembling voice. She almost whispered.</p>
				<p>“Light the candles and make a fire in the young master’s room. Lay out the young master’s clothes.”</p>
				<p>It was neither the place nor the time for Miss Stafva to be important. But there was all the same a certain superior ring in her voice as she answered:</p>
				<p>“There is always a fire in the young master’s room. The young master’s clothes are always in readiness for him.”</p>
				<p>“Ingrid had better go up to her room,” said her ladyship.</p>
				<p>The young girl did just the opposite. She went into the drawing-room, placed herself at the window, sobbed and shook, but did not herself know that she was not still. She impatiently dried the tears from her eyes, so that she could see over the snowfield in front of the house. If only she did not cry, there was nothing she could miss seeing in the clear moonlight. At last he came.</p>
				<p>“There he is! there he is!” she cried to her ladyship. “He walks quickly! he runs! Do come and see!”</p>
				<p>Her ladyship sat quite still before the fire. She did not move. She strained her ears to hear, just as much as the other strained her eyes to see. She asked Ingrid to be quiet, so that she could hear how he walked. Ah, yes, she would be quiet. Her ladyship should hear how he walked. She grasped the windowsill, as if that could help her.</p>
				<p>“You <em>shall</em> be quiet,” she whispered, “so that her ladyship can hear how he walks.”</p>
				<p>Her ladyship sat bending forward, listening with all her soul. Did she already hear his steps in the courtyard? She probably thought he would go towards the kitchen. Did she hear that it was the front steps that creaked? Did she hear that it was the door to the front hall that opened? Did she hear how quickly he came up the stairs, two or three steps at a time? Had his mother heard that? It was not the dragging step of a peasant, as it had been when he left the house.</p>
				<p>It was almost more than they could bear, to hear him coming towards the door of the drawing-room. Had he come in then, they would no doubt both have screamed. But he turned down the corridor to his own rooms.</p>
				<p>Her ladyship fell back in her chair, and her eyes closed. Ingrid thought her ladyship would have liked to die at that moment. Without opening her eyes, she put out her hand. Ingrid went softly up and took it; the old lady drew her towards her.</p>
				<p>“Mignon, Mignon,” she said; “that was the right name after all. But,” she continued, “we must not cry. We must not speak about it. Take a stool and come and sit down by the fire. We must be calm, my little friend. Let us speak about something else. We must be perfectly calm when he comes in.”</p>
				<p>Half an hour afterwards Hede came in; the tea was on the table, and the chandelier was lighted. He had dressed; every trace of the peasant had disappeared. Ingrid and her ladyship pressed each other’s hands.</p>
				<p>They had been sitting trying to imagine how he would look when he came in. It was impossible to say what he might say or do, said her ladyship. One never had known what he might do. But in any case they would both be quite calm. A feeling of great happiness had come over her, and that had quieted her. She was resting, free from all sorrow, in the arms of angels carrying her upwards, upwards.</p>
				<p>But when Hede came in, there was no sign of confusion about him.</p>
				<p>“I have only come to tell you,” he said, “that I have got such a headache, that I shall have to go to bed at once. I felt it already when I was on the ice.”</p>
				<p>Her ladyship made no reply. Everything was so simple; she had never thought it would be like that. It took her a few moments to realize that he did not know anything about his illness, that he was living somewhere in the past.</p>
				<p>“But perhaps I can first drink a cup of tea,” he said, looking a little surprised at their silence.</p>
				<p>Her ladyship went to the tea-tray. He looked at her.</p>
				<p>“Have you been crying, mother? You are so quiet.”</p>
				<p>“We have been sitting talking about a sad story, I and my young friend here,” said her ladyship, pointing to Ingrid.</p>
				<p>“I beg your pardon,” he said. “I did not see you had visitors.”</p>
				<p>The young girl came forward towards the light, beautiful as one would be who knew that the gates of heaven the next moment would open before her.</p>
				<p>He bowed a little stiffly. He evidently did not know who she was. Her ladyship introduced them to each other. He looked curiously at Ingrid.</p>
				<p>“I think I saw Miss Berg on the ice,” he said.</p>
				<p>He knew nothing about her⁠—had never spoken to her before.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>A short, happy time followed. Gunnar Hede was certainly not quite himself; but those around him were happy in the belief that he soon would be. His memory was partly gone. He knew nothing about certain periods of his life; he could not play the violin; he had almost forgotten all he knew; and his power of thinking was weak; and he preferred neither to read nor to write. But still he was very much better. He was not frightened; he was fond of his mother; he had again assumed the manners and habits of a gentleman. One can easily understand that her ladyship and all her household were delighted.</p>
				<p>Hede was in the best of spirits⁠—bright and joyous all day long. He never speculated over anything, put to one side everything he could not understand, never spoke about anything that necessitated mental exertion, but talked merrily and cheerfully. He was most happy when he was engaged in bodily exercise. He took Ingrid out with him sledging and skating. He did not talk much to her, but she was happy to be with him. He was kind to Ingrid, as he was to everyone else, but not in the least in love with her. He often wondered about his fiancée⁠—wondered why she never wrote. But after a short time that trouble, too, left him. He always put away from him anything that worried him.</p>
				<p>Ingrid thought that he would never get really well by doing like this. He must some time be made to think⁠—to face his own thoughts, which he was afraid of doing now. But she dared not compel him to do this, and there was no one else who dared. If he began to care for her a little, perhaps she might dare. She thought all they now wanted, every one of them, was a little happiness.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>It was just at that time that a little child died at the Parsonage at Raglanda where Ingrid had been brought up; and the gravedigger was about to dig the grave.</p>
				<p>The man dug the grave quite close to the spot where the previous summer he had dug the grave for Ingrid. And when he had got a few feet into the ground he happened to lay bare a corner of her coffin. The gravedigger could not help smiling a little to himself. Of course he had heard that the dead girl lying in this coffin had appeared. She was supposed to have unscrewed her coffin-lid on the very day of her funeral, risen from the grave, and appeared at the Parsonage. The Pastor’s wife was not so much liked but that people in the parish rather enjoyed telling this story about her. The gravedigger thought that people should only know how securely the dead were lying in the ground, and how fast the coffin-lids.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>He interrupted himself in the midst of this thought. On the corner of the coffin which was exposed the lid was not quite straight, and one of the screws was not quite fast. He did not say anything, he did not think anything, but stopped digging and whistled the whole reveille of the Värmland Regiment⁠—for he was an old soldier. Then he thought he had better examine the thing properly. It would never do for a gravedigger to have thoughts about the dead which might come and trouble him during the dark autumn nights. He hastily removed some more earth. Then he began to hammer on the coffin with his shovel. The coffin answered quite distinctly that it was empty⁠—empty.</p>
				<p>Half an hour after the gravedigger was at the Parsonage. There was no end to the questionings and surmises. So much they were all agreed upon⁠—that the young girl had been in the Dalar man’s pack. But what had become of her afterwards?</p>
				<p>Anna Stina stood at the oven in the Parsonage and looked after the baking, for of course there was baking to be done for the new funeral. She stood for a long time listening to all this talk without saying a word. All she took care of was that the cakes were not burnt. She put sheet-tins in and took sheet-tins out, and it was dangerous to approach her as she stood there with the long baker’s shovel. But suddenly she took off her kitchen-apron, wiped the worst of the sweat and the soot from her face, and was talking with the Pastor in his study almost before she knew how it had come about.</p>
				<p>After this it was not so very wonderful that one day in March the Pastor’s little red-painted sledge, ornamented with green tulips, and drawn by the Pastor’s little red horse, pulled up at Munkhyttan. Ingrid was of course obliged to go back with the Pastor home to her mother. The Pastor had come to fetch her. He did not say much about their being glad that she was alive, but one could see how happy he was. He had never been able to forgive himself that they had not been more kind to their adopted daughter. And now he was radiant at the thought that he was allowed to make a new beginning and make everything good for her this time.</p>
				<p>They did not speak a word about the reason why she had run away. It was of no use bringing that up again so long after. But Ingrid understood that the Pastor’s wife had had a hard time, and had suffered many pangs of conscience, and that they wanted to have her back again in order to be good to her. She felt that she was almost obliged to go back to the Parsonage to show that she had no ill-feeling against her adopted parents.</p>
				<p>They all thought it was the most natural thing that she should go to the Parsonage for a week or two. And why should she not? She could not make the excuse that they needed her at Munkhyttan. She could surely be away for some weeks without it doing Gunnar Hede any harm. She felt it was hard, but it was best she should go away, as they all thought it was the right thing.</p>
				<p>Perhaps she had hoped they would ask her not to go away. She took her seat in the sledge with the feeling that her ladyship or Miss Stafva would surely come and lift her out of it, and carry her into the house again. It was impossible to realize that she was actually driving down the avenue, that she was turning into the forest, and that Munkhyttan was disappearing behind her.</p>
				<p>But supposing it was from pure goodness that they let her go? They thought, perhaps, that youth, with its craving for pleasure, wanted to get away from the loneliness of Munkhyttan. They thought, perhaps, she was tired of being the keeper of a crazy man. She raised her hand, and was on the point of seizing the reins and turning the horse. Now that she was several miles from the house it struck her that that was why they had let her go. She would have liked so much to have gone back and asked them.</p>
				<p>In her utter loneliness she felt as if she were groping about in the wild forest. There was not a single human being who answered her or advised her. She received just as much answer from fir and pine, and squirrel and owl, as she did from any human being.</p>
				<p>It was really a matter of utter indifference to her how they treated her at the Parsonage. They were very kind to her, as far as she knew, but it really did not matter. If she had come to a palace full of everything one could most desire, that would likewise have been the same to her. No bed is soft enough to give rest unto one whose heart is full of longing.</p>
				<p>In the beginning she had asked them every day, as modestly as she could, if they would not let her go home, now that she had had the great happiness of seeing her mother and her brothers and sisters. But the roads were really too bad. She must stay with them until the frost had disappeared. It was not a matter of life and death, they supposed, to go back to that place.</p>
				<p>Ingrid could not understand why it annoyed people when she said she wanted to go back to Munkhyttan. But this seemed to be the case with her father and her mother and everybody else in the parish. One had no right, it appeared, to long for any other place in the world, when one was at Raglanda.</p>
				<p>She soon saw it was best not to speak about her going away. There were so many difficulties in the way whenever she spoke about it. It was not enough that the roads were still in the same bad condition; they surrounded her with walls and ramparts and moats. She would knit and weave, and plant out in the forcing-frames. And surely she would not go away until after the large birthday party at the Dean’s? And she could not think of leaving till after Karin Landberg’s wedding.</p>
				<p>There was nothing for her to do but to lift her hands in supplication to the spring, and beg it to make haste with its work, beg for sunshine and warmth, beg the gentle sun to do its very best for the great border forest, send small piercing rays between the fir-trees, and melt the snow beneath them. Dear, dear sun! It did not matter if the snow were not melted in the valley, if only the snow would vanish from the mountains, if only the forest paths became passable, if only the Säter girls were able to go to their huts, if only the bogs became dry, if only it became possible to go by the forest road, which was half the distance of the high road.</p>
				<p>Ingrid knew one who would not wait for carriage, or ask for money to drive, if only the road through the forest became passable. She knew one who would leave the Parsonage some moonlight night, and who would do it without asking a single person’s permission.</p>
				<p>She thought she had waited for the spring before. That everybody does. But now Ingrid knew that she had never before longed for it. Oh no, no! She had never before known what it was to long. Before she had waited for green leaves and anemones, and the song of the thrush and the cuckoo. But that was childishness⁠—nothing more. They did not long for the spring who only thought of what was beautiful. One should take the first bit of earth that peeped through the snow, and kiss it. One should pluck the first coarse leaf of the nettle simply to burn into one that now the spring had come.</p>
				<p>Everybody was very good to her. But although they did not say anything, they seemed to think that she was always thinking of leaving them.</p>
				<p>“I can’t understand why you want to go back to that place and look after that crazy fellow,” said Karin Landberg one day. It seemed as if she could read Ingrid’s thoughts.</p>
				<p>“Oh, she has given up thinking of that now,” said the Pastor’s wife, before the young girl had time to answer.</p>
				<p>When Karin was gone the Pastor’s wife said:</p>
				<p>“People wonder that you want to leave us.”</p>
				<p>Ingrid was silent.</p>
				<p>“They say that when Hede began to improve perhaps you fell in love with him.”</p>
				<p>“Oh no! Not after he had begun to improve,” Ingrid said, feeling almost inclined to laugh.</p>
				<p>“In any case, he is not the sort of person one could marry,” said her adopted mother. “Father and I have been speaking about it, and we think it is best that you should remain with us.”</p>
				<p>“It is very good of you that you want to keep me,” Ingrid said. And she was touched that now they wanted to be so kind to her.</p>
				<p>They did not believe her, however obedient she was. She could not understand what little bird it was that told them about her longing. Now her adopted mother had told her that she must not go back to Munkhyttan. But even then she could not leave the matter alone.</p>
				<p>“If they really wanted you,” she said, “they would write for you.”</p>
				<p>Ingrid again felt inclined to laugh. That would be the strangest thing of all, should there be a letter from the enchanted castle. She would like to know if her adopted mother thought that the King of the Mountain wrote for the maiden who had been swallowed by the mountain to come back when she had gone to see her mother?</p>
				<p>But if her adopted mother had known how many messages she had received she would probably have been even more uneasy. There came messages to her in her dreams by nights, and there came messages to her in her visions by day. He let Ingrid know that he was in need of her. He was so ill⁠—so ill!</p>
				<p>She knew that he was nearly going out of his mind again, and that she must go to him. If anyone had told her this, she would simply have answered that she knew it.</p>
				<p>The large starlike eyes looked further and further away. Those who saw that look would never believe that she meant to stay quietly and patiently at home.</p>
				<p>It is not very difficult either to see whether a person is content or full of longing. One only needs to see a little gleam of happiness in the eyes when he or she comes in from work and sits down by the fire. But in Ingrid’s eyes there was no gleam of happiness, except when she saw the mountain stream come down through the forest, broad and strong. It was that that should prepare the way for her.</p>
				<p>It happened one day that Ingrid was sitting alone with Karin Landberg, and she began to tell her about her life at Munkhyttan. Karin was quite shocked. How could Ingrid stand such a life?</p>
				<p>Karin Landberg was to be married very soon. And she was now at that stage when she could speak of nothing but her lover. She knew nothing but what he had taught her, and she could do nothing without first consulting him.</p>
				<p>It occurred to her that Oluf had said something about Gunnar Hede which would help to frighten Ingrid if she had begun to like that crazy fellow. And then she began to tell her how mad he had really been. For Oluf had told her that when he was at the fair last autumn some gentlemen had said that they did not think the Goat was mad at all. He only pretended to be in order to attract customers. But Oluf had maintained that he was mad, and in order to prove it went to the market and bought a wretched little goat. And then it was plain enough to see that he was mad. Oluf had only put the goat in front of him on the counter where his knives and things lay, and he had run away and left both his pack and his wares, and they had all laughed so awfully when they saw how frightened he was. And it was impossible that Ingrid could care for anyone who had been so crazy.</p>
				<p>It was, no doubt, unwise of Karin Landberg that she did not look at Ingrid whilst she told this story. If she had seen how she frowned, she would perhaps have taken warning.</p>
				<p>“And you will marry anyone who could do such a thing!” Ingrid said. “I think it would be better to marry the Goat himself.”</p>
				<p>This Ingrid said in downright earnest, and it seemed so strange to Karin that she, who was always so gentle, should have said anything so unkind, that it quite worried her. For several days she was quite unhappy, because she feared Oluf was not what she would like him to be. It simply embittered Karin’s life until she made up her mind to tell Oluf everything; but he was so nice and good, that he quite reassured her.</p>
				<p>It is not an easy task to wait for the spring in Värmland. One can have sun and warmth in the evening, and the next morning find the ground white with snow. Gooseberry-bushes and lawns may be green, but the trees of the birch-forest are bare, and seem as if they will never spring out.</p>
				<p>At Whitsuntide there was spring in the air, but Ingrid’s prayers had been of no avail. Not a single Säter girl had taken up her abode in the forest, not a fen was dry; it was impossible to go through the forest.</p>
				<p>On Whit-Sunday Ingrid and her adopted mother went to church. As it was such a great festival, they had driven to church. In olden days Ingrid had very much enjoyed driving up to the church in full gallop, whilst people along the roadside politely took off their hats, and those who were standing on the road rushed to the side as if they were quite frightened. But at the present moment she could not enjoy anything. “Longing takes the fragrance from the rose, and the light from the full moon,” says an old proverb.</p>
				<p>But Ingrid was glad for what she heard in church. It did her good to hear how the disciples were comforted in their longing. She was glad that Jesus thought of comforting those who longed so greatly for Him.</p>
				<p>Whilst Ingrid and the rest of the congregation were in church a tall Dalar man came walking down the road. He wore a sheepskin coat, and had a large pack on his back, like one who cannot tell winter from summer, or Sunday from any other day. He did not go into the church, but stole timidly past the horses that were tied to the railings, and went into the churchyard.</p>
				<p>He sat down on a grave and thought of all the dead who were still sleeping, and of one of the dead who had awakened to life again. He was still sitting there when the people left the church. Karin Landberg’s Oluf was one of the first to leave the church, and when he happened to look across the churchyard he discovered the Dalar man. It is hard to say whether it was curiosity or some other motive that prompted him, but he went up to talk to him. He wanted to see if it were possible that he who was supposed to have been cured had become mad again.</p>
				<p>And it was possible. He told him at once that he sat there waiting for her who was called Grave-Lily. She was to come and play to him. She played so beautifully that the sun and the stars danced.</p>
				<p>Then Karin Landberg’s Oluf told him that she for whom he was waiting was standing outside the church. If he stood up, he could see her. She would, no doubt, be glad to see him.</p>
				<p>The Pastor’s wife and Ingrid were just getting into the carriage, when a tall Dalar man came running up to them. He came at a great pace in spite of all the horses he must curtsy to, and he beckoned eagerly to the young girl.</p>
				<p>As soon as Ingrid saw him she stood quite still. She could not have told whether she was most glad to see him again or most grieved that he had again gone out of his mind; she only forgot everything else in the world.</p>
				<p>Her eyes began to sparkle. In that moment she saw nothing of the poor wretched man. She only felt that she was once again near the beautiful soul of the man for whom she had longed so terribly.</p>
				<p>There were a great many people about, and they could not help looking at her. They could not take their eyes from her face. She did not move; she stood waiting for him. But those who saw how radiant she was with happiness must have thought that she was waiting for some great and noble man, instead of a poor, half-witted fellow.</p>
				<p>They said afterwards that it almost seemed as if there were some affinity between his soul and hers⁠—some secret affinity which lay so deeply hidden beneath their consciousness that no human being could understand it.</p>
				<p>But when Hede was only a step or two from Ingrid her adopted mother took her resolutely round the waist and lifted her into the carriage. She would not have a scene between the two just outside the church, with so many people present. And as soon as they were in the carriage the man sent his horses off at full gallop.</p>
				<p>A wild, terrified cry was heard as they drove away. The Pastor’s wife thanked God that she had got the young girl into the carriage.</p>
				<p>It was still early in the afternoon when a peasant came to the Parsonage to speak with the Pastor. He came to speak about the crazy Dalar man. He had now gone quite raving mad, and they had been obliged to bind him. What did the Pastor advise them to do? What should they do with him?</p>
				<p>The Pastor could give them no other advice but to take him home. He told the peasant who he was, and where he lived.</p>
				<p>Later on in the evening he told Ingrid everything. It was best to tell her the truth, and trust to her own common sense.</p>
				<p>But when night came it became clear to her that she had not time to wait for the spring. The poor girl set out for Munkhyttan by the high road. She would no doubt be able to get there by that road, although she knew that it was twice as long as the way through the forest.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>It was Whit-Monday, late in the afternoon. Ingrid walked along the high road. There was a wide expanse of country, with low mountains and small patches of birch forest between the fields. The mountain-ash and the bird-cherry were in bloom; the light, sticky leaves of the aspen were just out. The ditches were full of clear, rippling water which made the stones at the bottom glisten and sparkle.</p>
				<p>Ingrid walked sorrowfully along, thinking of him whose mind had again given way, wondering whether she could do anything for him, whether it was of any use that she had left her home in this manner.</p>
				<p>She was tired and hungry; her shoes had begun to go to pieces. Perhaps it would be better for her to turn back. She could never get to Munkhyttan.</p>
				<p>The further she walked, the more sorrowful she became. She could not help thinking that it could be of no use her coming now that he had gone quite out of his mind. There was no doubt it was too late now; it was quite hopeless to do anything for him.</p>
				<p>But as soon as she thought of turning back she saw Gunnar Hede’s face close to her cheek, as she had so often seen it before. It gave her new courage; she felt as if he were calling for her. She again felt hopeful and confident of being able to help him.</p>
				<p>Just as Ingrid raised her head, looking a little less downcast, a queer little procession came towards her.</p>
				<p>There was a little horse, drawing a little cart; a fat woman sat in the cart, and a tall, thin man, with long, thin moustaches walked by the side of it.</p>
				<p>In the country, where no one understood anything about art, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren always went in for looking like ordinary people. The little cart in which they travelled about was well covered over, and no one could suspect that it only contained fireworks and conjuring apparatus and marionettes.</p>
				<p>No one could suspect that the fat woman who sat on the top of the load, looking like a well-to-do shopkeeper’s wife, was formerly Miss Viola, who once sprang through the air, or that the man who walked by her side, and looked like a pensioned soldier, was the same <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren who occasionally, to break the monotony of the journey, took it into his head to turn a somersault over the horse, and play the ventriloquist with thrushes and siskins that sang in the trees by the roadside, so that he made them quite mad.</p>
				<p>The horse was very small, and had formerly drawn a roundabout, and therefore it would never go unless it heard music. On that account <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren generally sat playing the Jews’-harp, but as soon as they met anyone, she put it in her pocket, so that no one should discover they were artists, for whom country people have no respect whatever. Owing to this they did not travel very fast, but they were not in any hurry either.</p>
				<p>The blind man, who played the violin, had to walk some little distance behind the others in order not to betray the fact of his belonging to the company. The blind man was led by a little dog; he was not allowed to have a child to lead him, for that would always have reminded <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren of a little girl who was called Ingrid. That would have been too sad.</p>
				<p>And now they were all in the country on account of the spring. For however much money <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren were making in the towns, they felt they <em>must</em> be in the country at that time of the year, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren were artists.</p>
				<p>They did not recognise Ingrid, and she went past them without taking any notice of them, for she was in a hurry; she was afraid of their detaining her. But directly afterwards she felt that it was heartless and unkind of her, and turned back.</p>
				<p>If Ingrid could have felt glad about anything, she would have been glad by seeing the old people’s joy at meeting her. You may be sure they had plenty to talk about. The little horse turned its head time after time to see what was wrong with the roundabout.</p>
				<p>Strangely enough, it was Ingrid who talked the most. The two old people saw at once that she had been crying, and they were so concerned that she was obliged to tell them everything that had happened to her.</p>
				<p>But it was a relief to Ingrid to speak. The old people had their own way of taking things; they clapped their hands when she told them how she had got out of the grave and how she had frightened the Pastor’s wife. They caressed her and praised her because she had run away from the Parsonage. For them nothing was dull or sad, but everything was bright and hopeful. They simply had no standard by which to measure reality, and therefore its hardness could not affect them. They compared everything they heard with the pieces from marionette theatres and pantomimes. Of course, one also put a little sorrow and misery into the pantomime, but that was only done to heighten the effect. And, of course, everything would end well. In the pantomimes it always ended well.</p>
				<p>There was something infectious in all this hopefulness. Ingrid knew they did not at all understand how great her trouble was, but it was cheering all the same to listen to them.</p>
				<p>But they were also of real help to Ingrid. They told her that they had had dinner a short time since at the inn at Torsäker, and just as they were getting up from the table some peasants came driving up with a man who was mad. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren could not bear to see mad people, and wanted to go away at once, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren had consented. But supposing it was Ingrid’s madman! And they had hardly said the words before Ingrid said that it was very likely, and wanted to set off at once.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren then asked his wife in his own ceremonious manner if they were not in the country solely on account of the spring, and if it were not just the same where they went. And old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren asked him equally ceremoniously in her turn if he thought she would leave her beloved Ingrid before she had reached the harbour of her happiness.</p>
				<p>Then the old roundabout horse was turned, and conversation grew more difficult, because they again had to play on the Jews’-harp. As soon as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren wished to say anything, she was obliged to hand the instrument to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren, and when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren wanted to speak, he gave it back again to his wife. And the little horse stood still every time the instrument passed from mouth to mouth.</p>
				<p>The whole time they did their best to comfort Ingrid. They related all the fairy tales they had seen represented at the dolls’ theatre. They comforted her with the “Enchanted Princess,” they comforted her with “Cinderella,” they comforted her with all the fairy tales under the sun.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren watched Ingrid when they saw that her eyes grew brighter. “Artist’s eyes,” they said, nodding contentedly to each other. “What did we say? Artist’s eyes!”</p>
				<p>In some incomprehensible manner they had got the idea that Ingrid had become one of them, an artist. They thought she was playing a part in a drama. It was a triumph for them in their old age.</p>
				<p>On they went as fast as they could. The old couple were only afraid that the madman would not be at the inn any longer. But he was there, and the worst of it was, no one knew how to get him away.</p>
				<p>The two peasants from Raglanda who had brought him had taken him to one of the rooms and locked him in whilst they were waiting for fresh horses. When they left him his arms had been tied behind him, but he had somehow managed to free his hands from the cord, and when they came to fetch him he was free, and, beside himself with rage, had seized a chair, with which he threatened to strike anyone who approached him. They could do nothing but beat a hasty retreat and lock the door. The peasants now only waited for the landlord and his men to return and help them to bind him again.</p>
				<p>All the hope which Ingrid’s old friends had reawakened within her was, however, not quenched. She quite saw that Gunnar Hede was worse than he had ever been before, but that was what she had expected. She still hoped. It was not their fairy tales, it was their great love that had given her new hope.</p>
				<p>She asked the men to let her go to the madman. She said she knew him, and he would not do her any harm; but the peasants said they were not mad. The man in the room would kill anybody who went in.</p>
				<p>Ingrid sat down to think. She thought how strange it was that she should meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren just today. Surely that meant something. She would never have met them if it had not been for some purpose. And Ingrid thought of how Hede had regained his senses the last time. Could she not again make him do something which would remind him of olden days, and drive away his mad thoughts? She thought and thought.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren sat on a seat outside the inn, looking more unhappy than one would have thought was possible. They were not far from crying.</p>
				<p>Ingrid, their “child,” came up to them with a smile⁠—such a smile as only she could have⁠—and stroked their old, wrinkled cheeks, and said it would please her so much if they would let her see a performance like those she used to see every day in the olden time. It would be such a comfort to her.</p>
				<p>At first they said no, for they were not at all in proper artist humour, but when she had expended a few smiles upon them they could not resist her. They went to their cart and unpacked their costumes.</p>
				<p>When they were ready they called for the blind man, and Ingrid selected the place where the performance was to be held. She would not let them perform in the yard, but took them into the garden belonging to the inn, for there was a garden belonging to this inn. It was mostly full of beds for vegetables which had not yet come up, but here and there was an apple-tree in bloom. And Ingrid said she would like them to perform under one of the apple-trees in bloom.</p>
				<p>Some lads and servant-girls came running when they heard the violin, so there was a small audience. But it was hard work for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren to perform. Ingrid had asked too much of them; they were really much too sad.</p>
				<p>And it was very unfortunate that Ingrid had taken them out into the garden. She had evidently not remembered that the rooms in the inn faced this way. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren was very nearly running away when she heard a window in one of the rooms quickly opened. Supposing the madman had heard the music, and supposing he jumped out of the window and came to them?</p>
				<p>But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren was somewhat reassured when she saw who had opened the window. It was a young gentleman with a pleasant face. He was in shirtsleeves, but otherwise very decently dressed. His eye was quiet, his lips smiled, and he stroked his hair back from his forehead with his hand.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blomgren was working, and was so taken up with the performance that he did not notice anything. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren, who had nothing else to do but kiss her hands in all directions, had time to observe everything.</p>
				<p>It was astonishing how radiant Ingrid suddenly looked. Her eyes shone as never before, and her face was so white that light seemed to come from it. And all this radiancy was directed towards the man in the window.</p>
				<p>He did not hesitate long. He stood up on the windowsill and jumped down to them, and he went up to the blind man and asked him to lend him his violin. Ingrid at once took the violin from the blind man and gave it to him.</p>
				<p>“Play the waltz from <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera" xml:lang="de">Freischütz</i>,” she said.</p>
				<p>Then the man began to play, and Ingrid smiled, but she looked so unearthly that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren almost thought that she would dissolve into a sunbeam, and fly away from them. But as soon as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blomgren heard the man play she knew him again.</p>
				<p>“Is that how it is?” she said to herself. “Is it he? That was why she wanted to see two old people perform.”</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Gunnar Hede, who had been walking up and down his room in such a rage that he felt inclined to kill someone, had suddenly heard a blind man playing outside his window, and that had taken him back to an incident in his former life.</p>
				<p>He could not at first understand where his own violin was, but then he remembered that Alin had taken it away with him, and now the only thing left for him to do was to try and borrow the blind man’s violin to play himself quiet again; he was so excited. And as soon as he had got the violin in his hand he began to play. It never occurred to him that he could not play. He had no idea that for several years he had only been able to play some poor little tunes.</p>
				<p>He thought all the time he was in Upsala, outside the house with the Virginia-creepers, and he expected the acrobats would begin to dance as they had done last time. He endeavoured to play with more life to make them do so, but his fingers were stiff and awkward; the bow would not properly obey them. He exerted himself so much that the perspiration stood on his forehead.</p>
				<p>At last, however, he got hold of the right tune⁠—the same they had danced to the last time. He played it so enticingly, so temptingly, that it ought to have melted their hearts. But the old acrobats did not begin to dance. It was a long time since they had met the student at Upsala; they did not remember how enthusiastic they were then. They had no idea what he expected them to do.</p>
				<p>Gunnar Hede looked at Ingrid for an explanation why they did not dance. When he looked at her there was such an unearthly radiance in her eyes that in his astonishment he gave up playing. He stood a moment looking round the small crowd. They all looked at him with such strange, uneasy glances. It was impossible to play with people staring at him so. He simply went away from them. There were some apple-pears in bloom at the other end of the garden, so he went there.</p>
				<p>He saw now that nothing fitted in with the ideas he had just had that Alin had locked him in, and that he was at Upsala. The garden was too large, and the house was not covered with red creepers. No, it could not be Upsala. But he did not mind very much where he was. It seemed to him as if he had not played for centuries, and now he had got hold of a violin. Now he would play. He placed the violin against his cheek, and began. But again he was stopped by the stiffness in his fingers. He could only play the very simplest things.</p>
				<p>“I shall have to begin at the beginning,” he said.</p>
				<p>And he smiled and played a little minuet. It was the first thing he had learnt. His father had played it to him, and he had afterwards played it from ear. He saw all at once the whole scene before him, and he heard the words:</p>
				<p>“The little Prince should learn to dance, but he broke his little leg.”</p>
				<p>Then he tried to play several other small dances. They were some he had played as a school boy. They had asked him to play at the dancing-lessons at the young ladies’ boarding-school. He could see the girls dance and swing about, and could hear the dancing-mistress beat the time with her foot.</p>
				<p>Then he grew bolder. He played first violin in one of Mozart’s quartettes. When he learnt that, he was in the Sixth Form at the Latin school at Falun. Some old gentlemen had practised this quartette for a concert, but the first violin had been taken ill, and he was asked to take his part, young as he was. He remembered how proud he had been.</p>
				<p>Gunnar Hede only thought of getting his fingers into practice when he played these childish exercises. But he soon noticed that something strange was happening to him. He had a distinct sensation that in his brain there was some great darkness that hid his past. As soon as he tried to remember anything, it was as if he were trying to find something in a dark room; but when he played, some of the darkness vanished. Without his having thought of it, the darkness had vanished so much that he could now remember his childhood and school life.</p>
				<p>Then he made up his mind to let himself be led by the violin; perhaps it could drive away all the darkness. And so it did, for every piece he played the darkness vanished a little. The violin led him through the one year after the other, awoke in him memories of studies, friends and pleasures. The darkness stood like a wall before him, but when he advanced against it, armed with the violin, it vanished step by step. Now and then he looked round to see whether it closed again behind him. But behind him was bright day.</p>
				<p>The violin came to a series of duets for piano and violin. He only played a bar or two of each. But a large portion of the darkness vanished; he remembered his fiancée and his engagement. He would like to have dwelt a little over this, but there was still much darkness left to be played away. He had no time.</p>
				<p>He glided into a hymn. He had heard it once when he was unhappy. He remembered he was sitting in a village church when he heard it. But why had he been unhappy? Because he went about the country selling goods like a poor pedlar. It was a hard life. It was sad to think about it.</p>
				<p>The bow went over the strings like a whirlwind, and again cut through a large portion of the darkness. Now he saw the Fifty-Mile Forest, the snow-covered animals, the weird shapes, the drifts made of them. He remembered the journey to see his fiancée, remembered that she had broken the engagement. All this became clear to him at one time.</p>
				<p>He really felt neither sorrow nor joy over anything he remembered. The most important thing was that he did remember. This of itself was an unspeakable pleasure. But all at once the bow stopped, as if of its own accord. It would not lead him any further. And yet there was more⁠—much more⁠—that he must remember. The darkness still stood like a solid wall before him.</p>
				<p>He compelled the bow to go on. And it played two quite common tunes, the poorest he had ever heard. How could his bow have learned such tunes? The darkness did not vanish in the least for these tunes. They really taught him nothing; but from them came a terror which he could not remember having ever felt before⁠—an inconceivable, awful fear, the mad terror of a doomed soul.</p>
				<p>He stopped playing; he could not bear it. What was there in these tunes⁠—what was there? The darkness did not vanish for them, and the awful thing was, that it seemed to him that when he did not advance against the darkness with the violin and drive it before him, it came gliding towards him to overwhelm him.</p>
				<p>He had been standing playing, with his eyes half closed; now he opened them and looked into the world of reality. He saw Ingrid, who had been standing listening to him the whole time. He asked her, not expecting an answer, but simply to keep back the darkness for a moment:</p>
				<p>“When did I last play this tune?”</p>
				<p>But Ingrid stood trembling. She had made up her mind, whatever happened, now he should hear the truth. Afraid she was, but at the same time full of courage, and quite decided as to what she meant to do. He should not again escape her, not be allowed to slip away from her. But in spite of her courage she did not dare to tell him straight out that these were the tunes he had played whilst he was out of his mind; she evaded the question.</p>
				<p>“That was what you used to play at Munkhyttan last winter,” she said.</p>
				<p>Hede felt as if he were surrounded by nothing but mysteries. Why did this young girl say “<i xml:lang="sv">du</i>” to him? She was not a peasant girl.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> Her hair was dressed like other young ladies’, on the top of the head and in small curls. Her dress was home-woven, but she wore a lace collar. She had small hands and a refined face. This face, with the large, dreamy eyes, could not belong to a peasant girl. Hede’s memory could not tell him anything about her. Why did she, then, say “<i xml:lang="sv">du</i>” to him? How did she know that he had played these tunes at home?</p>
				<p>“What is your name?” he said. “Who are you?”</p>
				<p>“I am Ingrid, whom you saw at Upsala many years ago, and whom you comforted because she could not learn to dance on the tightrope.”</p>
				<p>This went back to the time he could partly remember. Now he did remember her.</p>
				<p>“How tall and pretty you have grown, Ingrid!” he said. “And how fine you have become! What a beautiful brooch you have!”</p>
				<p>He had been looking at her brooch for some time. He thought he knew it; it was like a brooch of enamel and pearls his mother used to wear. The young girl answered at once.</p>
				<p>“Your mother gave it to me. You must have seen it before.”</p>
				<p>Gunnar Hede put down the violin and went up to Ingrid. He asked her almost violently:</p>
				<p>“How is it possible⁠—how can you wear her brooch? How is it that I don’t know anything about your knowing my mother?”</p>
				<p>Ingrid was frightened. She grew almost gray with terror. She knew already what the next question would be.</p>
				<p>“I know nothing, Ingrid. I don’t know why I am here. I don’t know why you are here. Why don’t I know all this?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, don’t ask me!”</p>
				<p>She went back a step or two, and stretched out her hands as if to protect herself.</p>
				<p>“Won’t you tell me?”</p>
				<p>“Don’t ask! don’t ask!”</p>
				<p>He seized her roughly by the wrist to compel her to tell the truth.</p>
				<p>“Tell me! I am in my full senses! Why is there so much I can’t remember?”</p>
				<p>She saw something wild and threatening in his eyes. She knew now that she would be obliged to tell him. But she felt as if it were impossible to tell a man that he had been mad. It was much more difficult than she had thought. It was impossible⁠—impossible!</p>
				<p>“Tell me!” he repeated.</p>
				<p>But she could hear from his voice that he would not hear it. He was almost ready to kill her if she told him. Then she summoned up all her love, and looked straight into Gunnar Hede’s eyes, and said:</p>
				<p>“You have not been quite right.”</p>
				<p>“Not for a long time?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t quite know⁠—not for three or four years.”</p>
				<p>“Have I been out of my mind?”</p>
				<p>“No, no! You have bought and sold and gone to the fairs.”</p>
				<p>“In what way have I been mad?”</p>
				<p>“You were frightened.”</p>
				<p>“Of whom was I frightened?”</p>
				<p>“Of animals.”</p>
				<p>“Of goats, perhaps?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, mostly of goats.”</p>
				<p>He had stood clutching her by the wrist the whole time. He now flung her hand away from him⁠—simply flung it. He turned away from Ingrid in a rage, as if she had maliciously told him an infamous lie.</p>
				<p>But this feeling gave way for something else which excited him still more. He saw before his eyes, as distinctly as if it had been a picture, a tall Dalar man, weighed down by a huge pack. He was going into a peasant’s house, but a wretched little dog came rushing at him. He stopped and curtsied and curtsied, and did not dare to go in until a man came out of the house, laughing, and drove the dog away.</p>
				<p>When he saw this he again felt that terrible fear. In this anguish the vision disappeared, but then he heard voices. They shouted and shrieked around him. They laughed. Derision was showered upon him. Worst and loudest were the shrill voices of children. One word, one name came over and over again: it was shouted, shrieked, whispered, wheezed into his ear⁠—“The Goat! the Goat!” And that all meant him, Gunnar Hede. All that he had lived in. He felt in full consciousness the same unspeakable fear he had suffered whilst out of his mind. But now it was not fear for anything outside himself⁠—now he was afraid of himself.</p>
				<p>“It was I! it was I!” he said, wringing his hands. The next moment he was kneeling against a low seat. He laid his head down and cried, cried: “It was I!” He moaned and sobbed. “It was I!” How could he have courage to bear this thought⁠—a madman, scorned and laughed at by all? “Ah! let me go mad again!” he said, hitting the seat with his fist. “This is more than a human being can bear.”</p>
				<p>He held his breath a moment. The darkness came towards him as the saviour he invoked. It came gliding towards him like a mist. A smile passed over his lips. He could feel the muscles of his face relax, feel that he again had the look of a madman. But that was better. The other he could not bear. To be pointed at, jeered at, scorned, mad! No, it was better to be so again and not to know it. Why should he come back to life? Everyone must loathe him. The first light, fleeting clouds of the great darkness began to enwrap him.</p>
				<p>Ingrid stood there, seeing and hearing all his anguish, not knowing but that all would soon be lost again. She saw clearly that madness was again about to seize him. She was so frightened, so frightened, all her courage had gone. But before he again lost his senses, and became so scared that he allowed no one to come near him, she would at least take leave of him and of all her happiness.</p>
				<p>Gunnar Hede felt that Ingrid came and knelt down beside him, laid her arm round his neck, put her cheek to his, and kissed him. She did not think herself too good to come near him, the madman, did not think herself too good to kiss him.</p>
				<p>There was a faint hissing in the darkness. The mist lifted, and it was as if serpents had raised their heads against him, and now wheezed with anger that they could not reach to sting him.</p>
				<p>“Do not be so unhappy,” Ingrid said. “Do not be so unhappy. No one thinks of the past, if you will only get well.”</p>
				<p>“I want to be mad again,” he said. “I cannot bear it. I cannot bear to think how I have been.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, you can,” said Ingrid.</p>
				<p>“No; that no one can forget,” he moaned. “I was so dreadful! No one can love me.”</p>
				<p>“I love you,” she said.</p>
				<p>He looked up doubtfully.</p>
				<p>“You kissed me in order that I should not go out of my mind again. You pity me.”</p>
				<p>“I will kiss you again,” she said.</p>
				<p>“You say that now because you think I am in need of hearing it.”</p>
				<p>“Are you in need of hearing that someone loves you?”</p>
				<p>“If I am⁠—if I am? Ah, child,” he said, and tore himself away from her, “how can I possibly bear it, when I know that everyone who sees me thinks: ‘That fellow has been mad; he has gone about curtsying for dogs and cats.’ ”</p>
				<p>Then he began again. He lay crying with his face in his hands.</p>
				<p>“It is better to go out of one’s mind again. I can hear them shouting after me, and I see myself, and the anguish, the anguish, the anguish⁠—”</p>
				<p>But then Ingrid’s patience came to an end.</p>
				<p>“Yes, that is right,” she cried; “go out of your mind again. I call that manly to go mad in order to escape a little anguish.”</p>
				<p>She sat biting her lips, struggling with her tears, and as she could not get the words out quickly enough, she seized him by the shoulder and shook him. She was enraged and quite beside herself with anger because he would again escape her, because he did not struggle and fight.</p>
				<p>“What do you care about me? What do you care about your mother? You go mad, and then you will have peace.” She shook him again by the arm. “To be saved from anguish, you say, but you don’t care about one who has been waiting for you all her life. If you had any thought for anyone but yourself, you would fight against this and get well; but you have no thought for others. You can come so touchingly in visions and dreams and beg for help, but in reality you will not have any help. You imagine that your sufferings are greater than anyone else’s, but there are others who have suffered more than you.”</p>
				<p>At last Gunnar Hede raised his eyes, and looked her straight in the face. She was anything but beautiful at this moment. Tears were streaming down her cheeks, and her lips trembled, whilst she tried to get out the words between her sobs. But in his eyes her emotion only made her more beautiful. A wonderful peace came over him, and a great and humble thankfulness. Something great and wonderful had come to him in his deepest humiliation. It must be a great love⁠—a great love.</p>
				<p>He had sat bemoaning his wretchedness, and Love came and knocked at his door. He would not merely be tolerated when he came back to life; people would not only with difficulty refrain from laughing at him.</p>
				<p>There was one who loved him and longed for him. She spoke hardly to him, but he heard love trembling in every single word. He felt as if she were offering him thrones and kingdoms. She told him that whilst he had been out of his mind he had saved her life. He had awakened her from the dead, had helped her, protected her. But this was not enough for her; she would possess him altogether.</p>
				<p>When she kissed him he had felt a life-giving balm enter his sick soul, but he had hardly dared to think that it was love that made her. But he could not doubt her anger and her tears. He was beloved⁠—he, poor wretched creature! he who had been held in derision by everybody! and before the great and humble bliss which now filled Gunnar Hede vanished the last darkness. It was drawn aside like a heavy curtain, and he saw plainly before him the region of terror through which he had wandered. But there, too, he had met Ingrid; there he had lifted her from the grave; there he had played for her at the hut in the forest; there she had striven to heal him.</p>
				<p>But only the memory of her came back: the feelings with which she had formerly inspired him now awoke. Love filled his whole being; he felt the same burning longing that he had felt in the churchyard at Raglanda when she was taken from him.</p>
				<p>In that region of terror, in that great desert, there had at any rate grown one flower that had comforted him with fragrance and beauty, and now he felt that love would dwell with him forever. The wild flower of the desert had been transplanted into the garden of life, and had taken root and grown and thriven, and when he felt this he knew he was saved; he knew that the darkness had found its master.</p>
				<p>Ingrid was silent. She was tired, as one is tired after hard work; but she was also content, for she felt she had carried out her work in the best possible manner. She knew she had conquered.</p>
				<p>At last Gunnar Hede broke the silence.</p>
				<p>“I promise you that I will not give in,” he said.</p>
				<p>“Thank you,” Ingrid answered.</p>
				<p>Nothing more was said.</p>
				<p>Gunnar Hede thought he would never be able to tell her how much he loved her. It could never be told in words, only shown every day and every hour of his life.</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
