<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Fisherman’s Ring</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-fishermans-ring" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fisherman’s Ring</h2>
			<p>During the reign of the Doge Gradenigos there lived in Venice an old fisherman, Cecco by name. He had been an unusually strong man, and was still very strong for his age, but lately he had given up work and left it to his two sons to provide for him. He was very proud of his sons, and he loved them⁠—ah, signor, how he loved them!</p>
			<p>Fate had so ordered it that their bringing up had been almost entirely left to him. Their mother had died early, and so Cecco had to take care of them. He had looked after their clothes and cooked their food; he had sat in the boat with needle and cotton and mended and darned. He had not cared in the least that people had laughed at him on that account. He had also, quite alone, taught them all it was necessary for them to know. He had made a couple of able fishermen of them, and taught them to honour God and San Marco.</p>
			<p>“Always remember,” he said to them, “that Venice will never be able to stand in her own strength. Look at her! Has she not been built on the waves? Look at the low islands close to land, where the sea plays amongst the seaweed. You would not venture to tread upon them, and yet it is upon such foundation that the whole city rests. And do you not know that the north wind has strength enough to throw both churches and palaces into the sea? Do you not know that we have such powerful enemies, that all the princes in Christendom cannot vanquish them? Therefore you must always pray to San Marco, for in his strong hands rests the chains which hold Venice suspended over the depths of the sea.”</p>
			<p>And in the evening, when the moon shed its light over Venice, greenish-blue from the sea-mist; when they quietly glided up the Canale Grande and the gondolas they met were full of singers; when the palaces shone in their white splendour, and thousands of lights mirrored themselves in the dark waters⁠—then he always reminded them that they must thank San Marco for life and happiness.</p>
			<p>But oh, signor! he did not forget him in the daytime either. When they returned from fishing and glided over the water of the lagoons, light-blue and golden; when the city lay before them, swimming on the waves; when the great ships passed in and out of the harbour, and the palace of the Doges shone like a huge jewel-casket, holding all the world’s treasure⁠—then he never forgot to tell them that all these things were the gift of San Marco, and that they would all vanish if a single Venetian were ungrateful enough to give up believing in and adoring him.</p>
			<p>Then, one day, the sons went out fishing on the open sea, outside Lido. They were in company with several others, had a splendid vessel, and intended being away several days. The weather was fine, and they hoped for a goodly haul.</p>
			<p>They left the Rialto, the large island where the city proper lies, one early morning, and as they passed through the lagoons they saw all the islands which, like fortifications, protect Venice against the sea, appear through the mist of the morning. There were La Gindecca and San Giorgio on the right, and San Michele, Muracco and San Lazzaro on the left. Then island followed upon island in a large circle, right on to the long Lido lying straight before them, and forming, as it were, the clasp of this string of pearls. And beyond Lido was the wide, infinite sea.</p>
			<p>When they were well at sea, some of them got into a small boat and rowed out to set their nets. It was still fine weather, although the waves were higher here than inside the islands. None of them, however, dreamt of any danger. They had a good boat and were experienced men. But soon those left on the vessel saw that the sea and the sky suddenly grew darker in the north. They understood that a storm was coming on, and they at once shouted to their comrades, but they were already too far away to hear them.</p>
			<p>The wind first reached the small boat. When the fishermen suddenly saw the waves rise around them, as herds of cattle on a large plain arise in the morning, one of the men in the boat stood up and beckoned to his comrades, but the same moment he fell backwards into the sea. Immediately afterwards a wave came which raised the boat on her bows, and one could see how the men, as it were, were shaken from off their seats and flung into the sea. It only lasted a moment, and everything had disappeared. Then the boat again appeared, keel upwards. The men in the vessel tried to reach the spot, but could not tack against the wind.</p>
			<p>It was a terrific storm which came rushing over the sea, and soon the fishermen in the vessel had their work set to save themselves. They succeeded in getting home safely, however, and brought with them the news of the disaster. It was Cecco’s two sons and three others who had perished.</p>
			<p>Ah me! how strangely things come about! The same morning Cecco had gone down to the Rialto to the fish-market. He went about amongst the stands and strutted about like a fine gentleman because he had no need to work. He even invited a couple of old Lido fishermen to an asteri and stood them a beaker of wine. He grew very important as he sat there and bragged and boasted about his sons. His spirits rose high, and he took out the zecchine⁠—the one the Doge had given him when he had saved a child from drowning in Canale Grande. He was very proud of this large gold coin, carried it always about him, and showed it to people whenever there was an opportunity.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a man entered the asteri and began to tell about the disaster, without noticing that Cecco was sitting there. But he had not been speaking long before Cecco threw himself over him and seized him by the throat.</p>
			<p>“You do not dare to tell me that they are dead!” he shrieked⁠—“not my sons!”</p>
			<p>The man succeeded in getting away from him, but Cecco for a long time went on as if he were out of his mind. People heard him shout and groan; they crowded into the asteri⁠—as many as it could hold⁠—and stood round him in a circle as if he were a juggler.</p>
			<p>Cecco sat on the floor and moaned. He hit the hard stone floor with his fist, and said over and over again:</p>
			<p>“It is San Marco, San Marco, San Marco!”</p>
			<p>“Cecco, you have taken leave of your senses from grief,” they said to him.</p>
			<p>“I knew it would happen on the open sea,” Cecco said; “outside Lido and Malamocco, there, I knew it would happen. There San Marco would take them. He bore them a grudge. I have feared it, boy. Yes,” he said, without hearing what they said to quiet him, “they once laughed at him, once when we were lying outside Lido. He has not forgotten it; he will not stand being laughed at.”</p>
			<p>He looked with confused glances at the bystanders, as if to seek help.</p>
			<p>“Look here, Beppo from Malamocca,” he said, stretching out his hand towards a big fisherman, “don’t you believe it was San Marco?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t imagine any such thing, Cecco.”</p>
			<p>“Now you shall hear, Beppo, how it happened. You see, we were lying out at sea, and to while away the time I told them how San Marco had come to Venice. The evangelist San Marco was first buried in a beautiful cathedral at Alexandria in Egypt. But the town got into the possession of unbelievers, and one day the Khalifa ordered that they should build him a magnificent palace at Alexandria, and take some columns from the Christian churches for its decoration. But just at that time there were two Venetian merchants at Alexandria who had ten heavily-laden vessels lying in the harbour. When these men entered the church where San Marco was buried and heard the command of the Khalifa, they said to the sorrowful priests: ‘The precious body which you have in your church may be desecrated by the Saracens. Give it to us; we will honour it, for San Marco was the first to preach on the Lagoon, and the Doge will reward you.’ And the priests gave their consent, and in order that the Christians of Alexandria should not object, the body of another holy man was placed in the Evangelist’s coffin. But to prevent the Saracens from getting any news of the removal of the body, it was placed at the bottom of a large chest, and above it were packed hams and smoked bacon, which the Saracens could not endure. So when the Customhouse officers opened the lid of the chest, they at once hurried away. The two merchants, however, brought San Marco safely to Venice; you know, Beppo, that this is what they say.”</p>
			<p>“I do, Cecco.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; but just listen now,” and Cecco half arose, and in his fear spoke in a low voice. “Something terrible now happened. When I told the boys that the holy man had been hidden underneath the bacon, they burst out laughing. I tried to hush them, but they only laughed the louder. Giacomo was lying on his stomach in the bows, and Pietro sat with his legs dangling outside the boat, and they both laughed so that it could be heard far out over the sea.”</p>
			<p>“But, Cecco, surely two children may be allowed to laugh.”</p>
			<p>“But don’t you understand that is where they have perished today⁠—on the very spot? Or can you understand why they should have lost their lives on that spot?”</p>
			<p>Now they all began to talk to him and comfort him. It was his grief which made him lose his senses. This was not like San Marco. He would not revenge himself upon two children. Was it not natural that when a boat was caught in a storm this would happen on the open sea and not in the harbour?</p>
			<p>Surely his sons had not lived in enmity with San Marco. They had heard them shout, “<i xml:lang="it">Eviva San Marco!</i>” as eagerly as all the others, and had he not protected them to this very day. He had never, during the years that had passed, shown any sign of being angry with them.</p>
			<p>“But, Cecco,” they said, “you will bring misfortune upon us with your talk about San Marco. You, who are an old man and a wise man, should know better than to raise his anger against the Venetians. What are we without him?”</p>
			<p>Cecco sat and looked at them bewildered.</p>
			<p>“Then you don’t believe it?”</p>
			<p>“No one in his senses would believe such a thing.”</p>
			<p>It looked as if they had succeeded in quieting him.</p>
			<p>“I will also try not to believe it,” he said. He rose and walked towards the door. “It would be too cruel, would it not?” he said. “They were too handsome and too brave for anyone to hate them; I will not believe it.”</p>
			<p>He went home, and in the narrow street outside his door he met an old woman, one of his neighbours.</p>
			<p>“They are reading a Mass in the cathedral for the souls of the dead,” she said to Cecco, and hurried away. She was afraid of him; he looked so strange.</p>
			<p>Cecco took his boat and made his way through the small canals down to Riva degli Schiavoni. There was a wide view from there; he looked towards Lido and the sea. Yes, it was a hard wind, but not a storm by any means; there were hardly any waves. And his sons had perished in weather like this! It was inconceivable.</p>
			<p>He fastened his boat, and went across the Piazetta and the Market Place into San Marco. There were many people in the church, and they were all kneeling and praying in great fear; for it is much more terrible for the Venetians, you know, than any other people when there is a disaster at sea. They do not get their living from vineyards or fields, but they are all, everyone of them, dependent on the sea. Whenever the sea rose against any one of them they were all afraid, and hurried to San Marco to pray to him for protection.</p>
			<p>As soon as Cecco entered the cathedral he stopped. He thought of how he had brought his little sons there, and taught them to pray to San Marco. “It is he who carries us over the sea, who opens the gates of Byzance for us and gives us the supremacy over the islands of the East,” he said to them. Out of gratitude for all this the Venetians had built San Marco the most beautiful temple in the world, and no vessel ever returned from a foreign port without bringing a gift for San Marco.</p>
			<p>Then they had admired the red marble walls of the cathedral and the golden mosaic ceiling. It was as if no misfortune could befall a city that had such a sanctuary for her patron Saint.</p>
			<p>Cecco quickly knelt down and began to pray, the one <em>Paternoster</em> after the other. It came back, he felt. He would send it away by prayers. He would not believe anything bad about San Marco.</p>
			<p>But it had been no storm at all. And so much was certain, that even if the Saint had not sent the storm, he had, in any case, not done anything to help Cecco’s sons, but had allowed them to perish as if by accident. When this thought came upon him he began to pray; but the thought would not leave him.</p>
			<p>And to think that San Marco had a treasury in this cathedral full of all the glories of fairyland! To think that he had himself prayed to him all his life, and had never rowed past the Piazetta without going into the cathedral to invoke him!</p>
			<p>Surely it was not by a mere accident that his sons had today perished on the sea! Oh, it was miserable for the Venetians to have no one better to depend upon! Just fancy a Saint who revenged himself upon two children⁠—a patron Saint who could not protect against a gust of wind!</p>
			<p>He stood up, and he shrugged his shoulders, and disparagingly waved his hand when he looked towards the tomb of the Saint in the chancel.</p>
			<p>A verger was going about with a large chased silver-gilt dish, collecting gifts for San Marco. He went from the one person to the other, and also came to Cecco.</p>
			<p>Cecco drew back as if it were the Evil One himself who handed him the plate. Did San Marco ask for gifts from him? Did he think he deserved gifts from him?</p>
			<p>All at once he seized the large golden zecchine he had in his belt, and flung it into the plate with such violence that the ring of it could be heard all over the church. It disturbed those who were praying, and made them turn round. And all who saw Cecco’s face were terrified; he looked as if he were possessed of evil spirits.</p>
			<p>Cecco immediately left the church, and at first felt it as a great relief that he had been revenged upon the Saint. He had treated him as one treats a usurer who demands more than he is entitled to. “Take this too,” one says, and throws his last gold piece in the fellow’s face so that the blood runs down over his eyes. But the usurer does not strike again⁠—simply stoops and picks up the zecchine. So, too, had San Marco done. He had accepted Cecco’s zecchine, having first robbed him of his sons. Cecco had made him accept a gift which had been tendered with such bitter hatred. Would an honourable man have put up with such treatment? But San Marco was a coward⁠—both cowardly and revengeful. But he was not likely to revenge himself upon Cecco. He was, no doubt, pleased and thankful he had got the zecchine. He simply accepted it and pretended that it had been given as piously as could be.</p>
			<p>When Cecco stood at the entrance, two vergers quickly passed him.</p>
			<p>“It rises⁠—it rises terribly!” the one said.</p>
			<p>“What rises?” asked Cecco.</p>
			<p>“The water in the crypt. It has risen a foot in the last two or three minutes.”</p>
			<p>When Cecco went down the steps, he saw a small pool of water on the Market Place close to the bottom step. It was seawater, which had splashed up from the Piazetta. He was surprised that the sea had risen so high, and he hurried down to the Riva, where his boat lay. Everything was as he had left it, only the water had risen considerably. It came rolling in broad waves through the five sea-gates; but the wind was not very strong. At the Riva there were already pools of seawater, and the canals rose so that the doors in the houses facing the water had to be closed. The sky was all gray like the sea.</p>
			<p>It never struck Cecco that it might grow into a serious storm. He would not believe any such thing. San Marco had allowed his sons to perish without cause. He felt sure this was no real storm. He would just like to see if it would be a storm, and he sat down beside his boat and waited.</p>
			<p>Then suddenly rifts appeared in the dull-gray clouds which covered the sky. The clouds were torn asunder and flung aside, and large storm-clouds came rushing, black like warships, and from them scourging rain and hail fell upon the city. And something like quite a new sea came surging in from Lido. Ah, signor! they were not the swan-necked waves you have seen out there, the waves that bend their transparent necks and hasten towards the shore, and which, when they are pitilessly repulsed, float away again with their white foam-hair dispersed over the surface of the sea. These were dark waves, chasing each other in furious rage, and over their tops the bitter froth of the sea was whipped into mist.</p>
			<p>The wind was now so strong that the seagulls could no longer continue their quiet flight, but, shrieking, were thrust from their course. Cecco soon saw them with much trouble making their way towards the sea, so as not to be caught by the storm and flung against the walls. Hundreds of pigeons on San Marco’s square flew up, beating their wings, so that it sounded like a new storm, and hid themselves away in all the nooks and corners of the church roof.</p>
			<p>But it was not the birds alone that were frightened by the storm. A couple of gondolas had already got loose, and were thrown against the shore, and were nearly shattered. And now all the gondoliers came rushing to pull their boats into the boathouses, or place them in shelter in the small canals.</p>
			<p>The sailors on the ships lying in the harbour worked with the anchor-chains to make the vessels fast, in order to prevent them drifting on to the shore. They took down the clothes hanging up to dry, pulled their long caps well over their foreheads, and began to collect all the loose articles lying about in order to bring them below deck. Outside Canale Grande a whole fishing-fleet came hurrying home. All the people from Lido and Malamocco who had sold their goods at the Rialto were rushing homewards, before the storm grew too violent.</p>
			<p>Cecco laughed when he saw the fishermen bending over their oars and straining themselves as if they were fleeing from death itself. Could they not see that it was only a gust of wind? They could very well have remained and given the Venetian women time to buy all their cattle, fish, and crabs.</p>
			<p>He was certainly not going to pull his boat into shelter, although the storm was now violent enough for any ordinary man to have taken notice of it. The floating bridges were lifted up high and cast on to the shore, whilst the washerwomen hurried home shrieking. The broad-brimmed hats of the signors were blown off into the canals, from whence the street-boys fished them out with great glee. Sails were torn from the masts, and fluttered in the air with a cracking sound; children were knocked down by the strong wind; and the clothes hanging on the lines in the narrow streets were torn to rags and carried far away.</p>
			<p>Cecco laughed at the storm⁠—a storm which drove the birds away, and played all sorts of pranks in the street, like a boy. But, all the same, he pulled his boat under one of the arches of the bridge. One could really not allow what that wind might take it into its head to do.</p>
			<p>In the evening Cecco thought that it would have been fun to have been out at sea. It would have been splendid sailing with such a fresh wind. But on shore it was unpleasant. Chimneys were blown down; the roofs of the boathouses were lifted right off; it rained tiles from the houses into the canals; the wind shook the doors and the window-shutters, rushed in under the open loggias of the palaces and tore off the decorations.</p>
			<p>Cecco held out bravely, but he did not go home to bed. He could not take the boat home with him, so it was better to remain and look after it. But when anyone went by and said that it was terrible weather he would not admit it. He had experienced very different weather in his young days.</p>
			<p>“Storm!” he said to himself⁠—“call this a storm? And they think, perhaps, that it began the same moment I threw the zecchine to San Marco. As if he can command a real storm!”</p>
			<p>When night came the wind and the sea grew still more violent, so that Venice trembled in her foundations. Doge Gradenigo and the Gentlemen of the High Council went in the darkness of the night to San Marco to pray for the city. Torchbearers went before them, and the flames were spread out by the wind, so that they lay flat, like pennants. The wind tore the Doge’s heavy brocade gown, so that two men were obliged to hold it.</p>
			<p>Cecco thought this was the most remarkable thing he had ever seen⁠—Doge Gradenigo going himself to the cathedral on account of this bit of a wind! What would those people have done if there had been a real storm?</p>
			<p>The waves beat incessantly against the bulwarks. In the darkness of the night it was as if white-headed wresters sprang up from the deep, and with teeth and claws clung fast to the piles to tear them loose from the shore. Cecco fancied he could hear their angry snorts when they were hurled back again. But he shuddered when he heard them come again and again, and tear in the bulwarks.</p>
			<p>It seemed to him that the storm was far more terrible in the night. He heard shouts in the air, and that was not the wind. Sometimes black clouds came drifting like a whole row of heavy galleys, and it seemed as if they advanced to make an assault on the city. Then he heard distinctly someone speaking in one of the riven clouds over his head.</p>
			<p>“Things look bad for Venice now,” it said from the one cloud. “Soon our brothers the evil spirits will come and overthrow the city.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid San Marco will not allow it to happen,” came as a response from the other cloud.</p>
			<p>“San Marco has been knocked down by a Venetian, so he lies powerless, and cannot help anyone,” said the first.</p>
			<p>The storm carried the words down to old Cecco, and from that moment he was on his knees, praying San Marco for grace and forgiveness. For the evil spirits had spoken the truth. It did indeed look bad for Venice. The fair Queen of the Isles was near destruction. A Venetian had mocked San Marco, and therefore Venice was in danger of being carried away by the sea. There would be no more moonlight sails or her sea and in her canals, and no more barcaroles would be heard from her black gondolas. The sea would wash over the golden-haired signoras, over the proud palaces, over San Marco, resplendent with gold.</p>
			<p>If there was no one to protect these islands, they were doomed to destruction. Before San Marco came to Venice it had often happened that large portions of them had been washed away by the waves.</p>
			<p>At early dawn San Marco’s Church bells began to ring. People crept to the church, their clothes being nearly torn off them.</p>
			<p>The storm went on increasing. The priests had resolved to go out and adjure the storm and the sea. The main doors of the cathedral were opened, and the long procession streamed out of the church. Foremost the cross was carried, then came the choirboys with wax candles, and last in the procession were carried the banner of San Marco and the Sacred Host.</p>
			<p>But the storm did not allow itself to be cowed; on the contrary, it was as if it wished for nothing better to play with. It upset the choirboys, blew out the wax candles, and flung the baldachin, which was carried over the Host, on to the top of the Doge’s palace. It was with the utmost trouble that they saved San Marco’s banner, with the winged lion, from being carried away.</p>
			<p>Cecco saw all this, and stole down to his boat moaning loudly. The whole day he lay near the shore, often wet by the waves and in danger of being washed into the sea. The whole day he was praying incessantly to God and San Marco. He felt that the fate of the whole city depended upon his prayers.</p>
			<p>There were not many people about that day, but some few went moaning along the Riva. All spoke about the immeasurable damage the storm had wrought. One could see the houses tumbling down on the Murano. It was as if the whole island were under water. And also on the Rialto one or two houses had fallen.</p>
			<p>The storm continued the whole day with unabated violence. In the evening a large multitude of people assembled at the Market Place and the Piazetta, although these were nearly covered with water. People dared not remain in their houses, which shook in their very foundations. And the cries of those who feared disaster mingled with the lamentations of those whom it had already overtaken. Whole dwellings were under water; children were drowned in their cradles. The old and the sick had been swept with the overturned houses into the waves.</p>
			<p>Cecco was still lying and praying to San Marco. Oh, how could the crime of a poor fisherman be taken in such earnest? Surely it was not his fault that the saint was so powerless! He would let the demons take him and his boat; he deserved no better fate. But not the whole city!⁠—oh, God in heaven, not the whole city!</p>
			<p>“My sons!” Cecco said to San Marco. “What do I care about my sons when Venice is at stake! I would willingly give a son for each tile in danger of being blown into the canal if I could keep them in their place at that price. Oh, San Marco, each little stone of Venice is worth as much as a promising son.”</p>
			<p>At times he saw terrible things. There was a large galley which had torn itself from its moorings and now came drifting towards the shore. It went straight against the bulwark, and struck it with the ram’s head in her bows, just as if it had been an enemy’s ship. It gave blow after blow, and the attack was so violent that the vessel immediately sprang a leak. The water rushed in, the leak grew larger, and the proud ship went to pieces. But the whole time one could see the captain and two or three of the crew, who would not leave the vessel, cling to the deck and meet death without attempting to escape it.</p>
			<p>The second night came, and Cecco’s prayers continued to knock at the gate of heaven.</p>
			<p>“Let me alone suffer!” he cried. “San Marco, it is more than a man can bear, thus to drag others with him to destruction. Only send thy lion and kill me; I shall not attempt to escape. Everything that thou wilt have me give up for the city, that will I willingly sacrifice.”</p>
			<p>Just as he had uttered these words he looked towards the Piazetta, and he thought he could no longer see San Marco’s lion on the granite pillar. Had San Marco permitted his lion to be overthrown? old Cecco cried. He was nearly giving up Venice.</p>
			<p>Whilst he was lying there he saw visions and heard voices all the time. The demons talked and moved to and fro. He heard them wheeze like wild beasts every time they made their assaults on the bulwarks. He did not mind them much; it was worse about Venice.</p>
			<p>Then he heard in the air above him the beating of strong wings; this was surely San Marco’s lion flying overhead. It moved backwards and forwards in the air; he saw and yet he did not see it. Then it seemed to him as if it descended on Riva degli Schiavoni, where he was lying, and prowled about there. He was on the point of jumping into the sea from fear, but he remained sitting where he was. It was no doubt he whom the lion sought. If that could only save Venice, then he was quite willing to let San Marco avenge himself upon him.</p>
			<p>Then the lion came crawling along the ground like a cat. He saw it making ready to spring. He noticed that it beat its wings and screwed its large carbuncle eyes together till they were only small fiery slits.</p>
			<p>Then old Cecco certainly did think of creeping down to his boat and hiding himself under the arch of the bridge, but he pulled himself together and remained where he was. The same moment a tall, imposing figure stood by his side.</p>
			<p>“Good evening, Cecco,” said the man; “take your boat and row me across to San Giorgio Maggiore.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, signor,” immediately replied the old fisherman.</p>
			<p>It was as if he had awakened from a dream. The lion had disappeared, and the man must be somebody who knew him, although Cecco could not quite remember where he had seen him before. He was glad to have company. The terrible heaviness and anguish that had been over him since he had revolted against the Saint suddenly vanished. As to rowing across to San Giorgio, he did not for a moment think that it could be done.</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe we can even get the boat out,” he said to himself.</p>
			<p>But there was something about the man at his side that made him feel he must do all he possibly could to serve him; and he did succeed in getting out the boat. He helped the stranger into the boat and took the oars.</p>
			<p>Cecco could not help laughing to himself.</p>
			<p>“What are you thinking about? Don’t go out further in any case,” he said. “Have you ever seen the like of these waves? Do tell him that it is not within the power of man.”</p>
			<p>But he felt as if he could not tell the stranger that it was impossible. He was sitting there as quietly as if he were sailing to the Lido on a summer’s eve. And Cecco began to row to San Giorgio Maggiore.</p>
			<p>It was a terrible row. Time after time the waves washed over them.</p>
			<p>“Oh, stop him!” Cecco said under his breath; “do stop the man who goes to sea in such weather! Otherwise he is a sensible old fisherman. Do stop him!”</p>
			<p>Now the boat was up a steep mountain, and then it went down into a valley. The foam splashed down on Cecco from the waves that rushed past him like runaway horses, but in spite of everything he approached San Giorgio.</p>
			<p>“For whom are you doing all this, risking boat and life?” he said. “You don’t even know whether he can pay you. He does not look like a fine gentleman. He is no better dressed than you are.”</p>
			<p>But he only said this to keep up his courage, and not to be ashamed of his tractability. He was simply compelled to do everything the man in the boat wanted.</p>
			<p>“But in any case not right to San Giorgio, you foolhardy old man,” he said. “The wind is even worse there than at the Rialto.”</p>
			<p>But he went there, nevertheless, and made the boat fast whilst the stranger went on shore. He thought the wisest thing he could do would be to slip away and leave his boat, but he did not do it. He would rather die than deceive the stranger. He saw the latter go into the Church of San Giorgio. Soon afterwards he returned, accompanied by a knight in full armour.</p>
			<p>“Row us now to San Nicolo in Lido,” said the stranger.</p>
			<p>“Ay, ay,” Cecco thought; “why not to Lido?” They had already, in constant anguish and death, rowed to San Giorgio; why should they not set out for Lido?</p>
			<p>And Cecco was shocked at himself that he obeyed the stranger even unto death, for he now actually steered for the Lido.</p>
			<p>Being now three in the boat, it was still heavier work. He had no idea how he should be able to do it. “You might have lived many years yet,” he said sorrowfully to himself. But the strange thing was that he was not sorrowful, all the same. He was so glad that he could have laughed aloud. And then he was proud that he could make headway. “He knows how to use his oars, does old Cecco,” he said.</p>
			<p>They laid-to at Lido, and the two strangers went on shore. They walked towards San Nicolo in Lido, and soon returned accompanied by an old Bishop, with robe and stole, crosier in hand, and mitre on head.</p>
			<p>“Now row out to the open sea,” said the first stranger.</p>
			<p>Old Cecco shuddered. Should he row out to the sea, where his sons perished? Now he had not a single cheerful word to say to himself. He did not think so much of the storm, but of the terror it was to have to go out to the graves of his sons. If he rowed out there, he felt that he gave the stranger more than his life.</p>
			<p>The three men sat silently in the boat as if they were on watch. Cecco saw them bend forward and gaze into the night. They had reached the gate of the sea at Lido, and the great storm-ridden sea lay before them.</p>
			<p>Cecco sobbed within himself. He thought of two dead bodies rolling about in these waves. He gazed into the water for two familiar faces. But onward the boat went. Cecco did not give in.</p>
			<p>Then suddenly the three men rose up in the boat; and Cecco fell upon his knees, although he still went on holding the oars. A big ship steered straight against them.</p>
			<p>Cecco could not quite tell whether it was a ship or only drifting mist. The sails were large, spread out, as it were, towards the four corners of heaven; and the hull was gigantic, but it looked as if it were built of the lightest sea-mist. He thought he saw men on board and heard shouting; but the crew were like deep darkness, and the shouting was like the roar of the storm.</p>
			<p>However it was, it was far too terrible to see the ship steer straight upon them, and Cecco closed his eyes.</p>
			<p>But the three men in the boat must have averted the collision, for the boat was not upset. When Cecco looked up the ship had fled out to sea, and loud wailings pierced the night.</p>
			<p>He rose, trembling to row further. He felt so tired that he could hardly hold the oars. But now there was no longer any danger. The storm had gone down, and the waves speedily laid themselves to rest.</p>
			<p>“Now row us back to Venice,” said the stranger to the fisherman.</p>
			<p>Cecco rowed the boat to Lido, where the Bishop went on shore, and to San Giorgio, where the knight left them. The first powerful stranger went with him all the way to the Rialto.</p>
			<p>When they had landed at Riva degli Schiavoni he said to the fisherman:</p>
			<p>“When it is daylight thou shalt go to the Doge and tell him what thou hast seen this night. Tell him that San Marco and San Giorgio and San Nicolo have tonight fought the evil spirits that would destroy Venice, and have put them to flight.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, signor,” the fisherman answered, “I will tell everything. But how shall I speak so that the Doge will believe me?”</p>
			<p>Then San Marco handed him a ring with a precious stone possessed of a wonderful lustre.</p>
			<p>“Show this to the Doge,” he said, “then he will understand that it brings a message from me. He knows my ring, which is kept in San Marco’s treasury in the cathedral.”</p>
			<p>The fisherman took the ring, and kissed it reverently.</p>
			<p>“Further, thou shalt tell the Doge,” said the holy man, “that this is a sign that I shall never forsake Venice. Even when the last Doge has left Palazzo Ducali I will live and preserve Venice. Even if Venice lose her islands in the East and the supremacy of the sea, and no Doge ever again sets out on the Bucintoro, even then I will preserve the city beautiful and resplendent. It shall always be rich and beloved, always be lauded and its praises sung, always a place of joy for men to live in. Say this, Cecco, and the Doge will not forsake thee in thine old age.”</p>
			<p>Then he disappeared; and soon the sun rose above the gate of the sea at Torcello. With its first beautiful rays it shed a rosy light over the white city and over the sea that shone in many colours. A red glow lay over San Giorgio and San Marco, and over the whole shore, studded with palaces. And in the lovely morning radiant Venetian ladies came out on to the loggias and greeted with smiles the rising day.</p>
			<p>Venice was once again the beautiful goddess, rising from the sea in her shell of rose-coloured pearl. Beautiful as never before, she combed her golden hair, and threw the purple robe around her, to begin one of her happiest days. For a transport of bliss filled her when the old fisherman brought San Marco’s ring to the Doge, and she heard how the Saint, now, and until the end of time, would hold his protecting hand over her.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
