<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Why the Pope Lived to Be So Old</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="why-the-pope-lived-to-be-so-old" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Why the Pope Lived to Be So Old</h2>
			<p>It happened at Rome in the early nineties. Leo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> was just then at the height of his fame and greatness. All true Catholics rejoiced at his successes and triumphs, which in truth were sublime. And, even for those who could not grasp the great political events, it was plain that the power of the Church was again coming to the front. Anyone at all could see that new cloisters were going up everywhere and that throngs of pilgrims were beginning to pour into Italy, as in olden times. In many, many places one saw the old, dilapidated churches in process of restoration, damaged mosaics being put in order, and the treasure-vaults of the churches being filled with golden relic-boxes and jewelled exhibits.</p>
			<p>Right in the midst of this progressive period the Roman people were alarmed by the news that the Pope had been taken ill. He was said to be in a very precarious condition; it was even rumored that he was dying.</p>
			<p>His condition was, too, in a great degree serious. The Pope’s physicians issued bulletins which inspired but little hope. It was maintained that the Pope’s great age⁠—he was then eighty years old⁠—made it seem almost incredible that he could survive this attack.</p>
			<p>Naturally, the Pope’s illness caused great unrest. In all the churches in Rome prayers were said for his recovery. The newspapers were filled with communications regarding the progress of the illness. The Cardinals were beginning to take steps and measures for the new Papal election.</p>
			<p>Everywhere they bemoaned the approaching demise of the brilliant leader. They feared that the good fortune which had followed the Church’s standard under Leo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> might not be faithful to it under the leadership of his successor. There were many who had hoped that this Pope would succeed in winning back Rome and the Ecclesiastical States. Others, again, had dreamed that he would bring back into the bosom of the Church some of the large Protestant countries.</p>
			<p>For each second that was passing, fear and anxiety grew apace. As night came on, in many homes the inmates would not retire. The churches were kept open until long past midnight, that the anxious ones might have an opportunity to go in and pray.</p>
			<p>Among these throngs of devotees there was certainly more than one poor soul who cried out: “Dear Lord, take my life instead of his! Let him, who has done so much for Thy glory, live, and extinguish instead my life-flame, which burns to no one’s use!”</p>
			<p>But if the Angel of Death had taken one of these devotees at his word and had suddenly stepped up to him, with sword raised, to exact the fulfilment of his promise, one might wonder somewhat as to how he would have behaved. No doubt he would have recalled instantly such a rash proffer and begged for the grace of being allowed to live out all the years of his allotted time.</p>
			<p>At this time there lived an old woman in one of the dingy ramshackle houses along the Tiber. She was one of those who have the kind of spirit that thanks God every day for life. Every morning she used to sit at the marketplace and sell garden truck. And this was an occupation that was very congenial to her. She thought nothing could be livelier than a market of a morning. All tongues were wagging⁠—all were harking their commodities, and buyers crowded in front of the stalls, selected and bargained, and many a good sally passed between buyer and seller. Sometimes the old woman was successful in making a good deal and in selling out her entire stock; but even if she couldn’t sell so much as a radish, she loved to be standing amongst flowers and green things in the fresh morning air.</p>
			<p>In the evening she had another and an even greater pleasure. Then her son came home and visited with her. He was a priest, but he had been assigned to a little church in one of the humble quarters. The poor priests who served there had not much to live upon, and the mother feared that her son was starving. But from this, also, she derived much pleasure, for it gave her the opportunity of stuffing him full of delicacies when he came to see her. He struggled against it, as he was destined for a life of self-denial and strict discipline, but his mother became so distressed when he said no that he always had to give in. While he was eating she trotted around in the room and chattered about all that she had seen in the morning during market hours. These were all very worldly matters, and it would occur to her sometimes that her son might be offended. Then she would break off in the middle of a sentence and begin to talk of spiritual and solemn things, but the priest couldn’t help laughing. “No, no, mother Concenza!” he said, “continue in your usual way. The saints know you already, and they know what you are up to.”</p>
			<p>Then she, too, laughed and said: “You are quite right. It doesn’t pay to pretend before the good Lord.”</p>
			<p>When the Pope was taken ill, Signora Concenza must also have a share in the general grief. Of her own accord it certainly never would have occurred to her to feel troubled about his passing. But when her son came home to her, she could neither persuade him to taste of a morsel of food nor to give her a smile, although she was simply bubbling over with stories and interpolations. Naturally she became alarmed and asked what was wrong with him. “The Holy Father is ill,” answered the son.</p>
			<p>At first she could scarcely believe that this was the cause of his downheartedness. Of course it was a sorrow; but she knew, to be sure, that if a Pope died, immediately there would come another. She reminded her son of the fact that they had also mourned the good Pio Nono. And, you see, the one who succeeded him was a still greater Pope. Surely the Cardinals would choose for them a ruler who was just as holy and wise as this one.</p>
			<p>The priest then began telling her about the Pope. He didn’t bother to initiate her into his system of government, but he told her little stories of his childhood and young manhood. And from the days of his prelacy there were also things to relate⁠—as, for instance, how he had at one time hunted down robbers in southern Italy, how he had made himself beloved by the poor and needy during the years when he was a bishop in Perugia.</p>
			<p>Her eyes filled with tears, and she cried out: “Ah, if he were not so old! If he might only be allowed to live many more years, since he is such a great and holy man!”</p>
			<p>“Ah, if only he were not so old!” sighed the son.</p>
			<p>But Signora Concenza had already brushed the tears from her eyes. “You really must bear this calmly,” said she. “Remember that his years of life are simply run out. It is impossible to prevent death from seizing him.”</p>
			<p>The priest was a dreamer. He loved the Church and had dreamed that the great Pope would lead her on to important and decisive victories. “I would give my life if I could purchase new life for him!” said he.</p>
			<p>“What are you saying?” cried his mother. “Do you really love him so much? But, in any case, you must not express such dangerous wishes. Instead, you should think of living a good long time. Who knows what may happen? Why couldn’t you, in your turn, become Pope?”</p>
			<p>A night and a day passed without any improvement in the Pope’s condition. When Signora Concenza met her son the following day, he looked completely undone. She understood that he had passed the whole day in prayer and fasting, and she began to feel deeply grieved. “I verily believe that you mean to kill yourself for the sake of that sick old man!” said she.</p>
			<p>The son was hurt by again finding her without sympathy, and tried to persuade her to sympathize a little with his grief. “You, truly, more than anyone else, ought to wish that the Pope might live,” he said. “If he may continue to rule, he will name my parish priest for bishop before the year shall have passed and, in that event, my fortune is made. He will then give me a good place in a cathedral. You shall not see me going about any more in a worn-out cassock. I shall have plenty of money, and I shall be able to help you and all your poor neighbors.”</p>
			<p>“But if the Pope dies?” asked Signora Concenza breathlessly.</p>
			<p>“If the Pope dies, then no one can know⁠—If my parish priest doesn’t happen to be in favor with his successor, we must both remain where we now are for many years to come.”</p>
			<p>Signora Concenza came close to her son and regarded him anxiously. She looked at his brow, which was covered with wrinkles, and at his hair that was just turning gray. He looked tired and worn. It was actually imperative that he should have that place at the cathedral right away. “Tonight I shall go to church and pray for the Pope,” thought she. “It won’t do for him to die.”</p>
			<p>After supper she bravely conquered her fatigue and went out on the streets. Great crowds of people thronged there. Many were only curious and had gone out because they wished to catch the news of the death at first hand; but many were really distressed and wandered from church to church to pray.</p>
			<p>As soon as Signora Concenza had come out on the street, she met one of her daughters, who was married to a lithographer. “Oh, mother, but you do right to come out and pray for him!” exclaimed the daughter. “You can’t imagine what a misfortune it would be if he were to die! My Fabiano was ready to take his own life when he learned that the Pope was ill.”</p>
			<p>She related how her husband, the lithographer, had but just struck off hundreds of thousands of the Pope’s pictures. Now, if the Pope were to die, he wouldn’t be able to sell half of them⁠—no, not even a quarter of them. He would be ruined. Their entire fortune was at stake.</p>
			<p>She rushed on to gather some fresh news, wherewith she might comfort her poor husband, who did not dare venture out, but sat at home and brooded over his misfortune. Her mother stood still on the street, mumbling to herself: “It won’t do for him to die. It will never do for him to die!”</p>
			<p>She walked into the first church she came to. There she fell upon her knees and prayed for the life of the Pope.</p>
			<p>As she arose to leave, she happened to lift her eyes to a little votive tablet which hung on the wall just above her head. The tablet was a representation of Death raising a terrifying two-edged sword to mow down a young girl, while her mother, who had cast herself in his path, tries in vain to receive the blow in place of her child.</p>
			<p>She stood long before the picture, musing. “Signor Death is a careful arithmetician,” she remarked. “One has never heard of his agreeing to exchange an old person for a young one.”</p>
			<p>She remembered her son’s words that he would be willing to die in the Pope’s stead, and a shudder passed through her whole body. “Think, if Death were to take him at his word!”</p>
			<p>“No, no, Signor Death!” she whispered. “You mustn’t believe him. You must understand that he didn’t mean what he said. He wants to live. He doesn’t want to leave his old mother, who loves him.”</p>
			<p>For the first time the thought struck her that if anyone should sacrifice himself for the Pope, it were better that she did it⁠—she, who was already old and had lived her life.</p>
			<p>When she left the church, she happened into the company of some nuns of the saintliest and most devout appearance, who lived in the northern part of the country. They had travelled down to Rome to obtain a little help from the Pope’s treasury. “We are actually in the most dire need of aid,” they told old Concenza. “Only think! our convent was so old and dilapidated that it blew down during the severe storm of last winter. We may not now present our case to him. If he should die, we must return home with an unaccomplished mission. Who can know if his successor will be the sort of man who will trouble himself to succor poor nuns?”</p>
			<p>It seemed as if all the people were thinking the same thoughts. It was very easy to get into converse with anyone. Each and all whom Signora Concenza approached let her know that the Pope’s death would be for them a terrible misfortune.</p>
			<p>The old woman repeated again and again to herself: “My son is right. It will never do for the Pope to die.”</p>
			<p>A nurse was standing among a group of people, talking in a loud voice. She was so affected that the tears streamed down her cheeks. She related how five years ago she had been ordered away, to serve at a leper hospital on an island at the other end of the globe. Naturally, she had to obey orders; but she did so against her wishes. She had felt a horrible dread of this mission. Before she left Rome, she was received by the Pope, who had given her a special blessing and had also promised her that if she came back alive she should have another audience with him. And it was upon this that she had lived during the five years she had been away⁠—only on the hope that she might see the Holy Father once more in this life! This had helped her to go through all the horrors. And now, when she had got home at last, she was met by the news that he lay upon his deathbed! She could not even see him!</p>
			<p>She was in extreme despair, and old Concenza was deeply moved. “It would really be much too great a sorrow for everyone if the Pope were to die,” thought she, as she wandered farther up the street.</p>
			<p>When she observed that many of the passersby looked perfectly exhausted from weeping, she thought with a sense of relief: “What a joy it would be to see everybody’s happiness if the Pope should recover!” And she, like many others who have a buoyant disposition, was apparently no more afraid of dying than of living; so she said to herself: “If I only knew how it could be done, I would gladly give the Holy Father the years that are left to me of life.”</p>
			<p>She said this somewhat in jest, but back of the words there was also seriousness. She truly wished that she might realize something in that way. “An old woman could not wish for a more beautiful death,” thought she. “I would be helping both my son and my daughter, and, besides, I should make great masses of people happy.”</p>
			<p>Just as this thought stirred within her, she raised the patched curtain which hung before the entrance of a gloomy little church. It was one of the very old churches⁠—one of those which appear to be gradually sinking into the earth because the city’s foundation has, in the intervening years, raised itself several metres all around them. This church in its interior had preserved somewhat of its ancient gloom, which must have come down through the dark ages during which it had sprung into existence. Involuntarily a shudder passed through one as one stepped in under its low arches, which rested upon uncommonly thick pillars, and saw the crudely painted saints’ pictures that glimpsed down at one from walls and altars.</p>
			<p>When Signora Concenza came into this old church, which was thronged with worshippers, she was seized with a mysterious awe and reverence. She felt that in this sanctuary there verily lived a Deity. Beneath the massive arches hovered something infinitely mighty and mysterious, something which inspired such a sense of annihilating superiority that she felt nervous about remaining in there. “Ah, this is no church where one goes to hear a mass or to confessional,” remarked Signora Concenza to herself. “Here one comes when one is in great trouble, when one can be helped in no other way than through a miracle.”</p>
			<p>She lingered down by the door and breathed in this strange air of mystery and gloom. “I don’t even know to whom this old church is dedicated; but I feel that here there must be someone who is able to grant us that which we pray for.”</p>
			<p>She sank down among the kneeling people, who were so many that they covered the floor from the altar to the door. All the while that she herself was praying, she heard around her sighs and sobs. All this grief went to her heart and filled it with greater and greater compassion. “Oh, my God, let me do something to save the old man!” she prayed. “In the first place, I ought to help my children, and then all the other people.”</p>
			<p>Every once in a while a thin little monk stole in among the praying and whispered something in their ears. The one to whom he was speaking instantly stood up and followed him into the sacristy.</p>
			<p>Signora Concenza soon apprehended what there was in question. “They are of the kind who give pledges for the Pope’s recovery,” thought she.</p>
			<p>The next time the little monk made his rounds, she rose up and went with him. It was a perfectly involuntary action. She fancied that she was being impelled to do this by the power which ruled in the old church.</p>
			<p>As soon as she came into the sacristy, which was even more archaic and more mystical than the church itself, she regretted it. “What have I to do in here?” she asked herself. “What have I to give away? I own nothing but a couple of cartloads of garden truck. I certainly can’t present the saints with a few baskets of artichokes!”</p>
			<p>At one side of the room there was a long table at which a priest stood recording in a register all that was pledged to the saints. Concenza heard how one promised to present the old church with a sum of money, while a second promised to give his gold watch, and a third her pearl earrings.</p>
			<p>Concenza stood all the while down by the door. Her last poor copper had been spent to procure a few delicacies for her son. She saw a number of persons who appeared to be no richer than herself buying wax candles and silver hearts. She turned her skirt pocket inside out, but she could not afford even that much.</p>
			<p>She stood and waited so long that finally she was the only stranger in the sacristy. The priests walking about in there looked at her a little astonished. Then she took a step or two forward. She seemed at the start uncertain and embarrassed, but after the first move she walked lightly and briskly up to the table. “Your Reverence!” she said to the priest, “write that Concenza Zamponi, who was sixty last year, on Saint John the Baptist’s Day, gives all her remaining years to the Pope, that the thread of his life may be lengthened!”</p>
			<p>The priest had already begun writing. He was probably very tired after having worked at this register the whole night, and thought no more about the sort of things he was recording. But now he stopped short in the middle of a word and looked quizzically at Signora Concenza. She met his glance very calmly.</p>
			<p>“I am strong and well, your Reverence,” said she. “I should probably have lived out my allotted seventy years. It is at least ten years that I am giving to the Holy Father.”</p>
			<p>The priest marked her zeal and reverence and offered no objections. “She is a poor woman,” thought he. “She has nothing else to give.”</p>
			<p>“It is written, my daughter,” he said.</p>
			<p>When old Concenza came out from the church, it was so late that the commotion had ceased and the streets were absolutely deserted. She found herself in a remote part of the city, where the gas lamps were so far apart that they dispelled only a very little of the darkness. All the same, she walked on briskly. She felt very solemn within and was certain that she had done something which would make many people happy.</p>
			<p>As she walked up the street, she suddenly got the impression that a live being circled above her head. In the darkness, between the tall houses, she thought she could distinguish a pair of large wings, and she even fancied she heard the sound of their beating.</p>
			<p>“What is this?” said she. “Surely it can’t be a bird! It is much too big for that.” All at once she thought she saw a face which was so white that it illuminated the darkness. Then an unspeakable terror seized her. “It is the Angel of Death hovering over me,” thought she. “Ah, what have I done? I have placed myself in the dreaded one’s power!”</p>
			<p>She started to run, but she could hear the rustle of the strong wings and was convinced that Death was pursuing her.</p>
			<p>She fled with breathless haste through several streets, thinking all the while that Death was coming nearer and nearer her. She already felt his wings brushing against her shoulder.</p>
			<p>Suddenly she heard a whizzing in the air, and something heavy and sharp struck her head. Death’s two-edged sword had reached her. She sank to her knees. She knew that she must lose her life.</p>
			<p>A few hours later, old Concenza was found on the street by two workmen. She lay there unconscious, stricken with apoplexy. The poor woman was immediately removed to a hospital, where they succeeded in bringing her to, but it was apparent that she could not live very long.</p>
			<p>There was time, at all events, to send for her children. When, in a state of despair, they reached her sickbed, they found her very calm and happy. She couldn’t speak many words to them, but she lay and caressed their hands. “You must be happy,” said she, “happy, happy!” Evidently she did not like their crying. She also bade the nurses smile and show their joy. “Cheerful and happy,” said she; “now you must be cheerful and happy!” She lay there with hunger in her eyes, waiting to see a little joy in their faces.</p>
			<p>She grew more and more impatient with her children’s tears and with the solemn faces of the nurses. She began to utter things which no one could comprehend. She said that in case they were not glad she might just as well have lived. Those who heard her thought she was raving.</p>
			<p>Suddenly the doors opened, and a young physician came into the sickroom. He was waving a newspaper and calling in a loud voice: “The Pope is better. He will live. A change has taken place in the night.”</p>
			<p>The nurses silenced him, so that he shouldn’t disturb the dying woman, but Signora Concenza had already heard him.</p>
			<p>She had also marked a spark of joy⁠—a gleam of happiness which could not be concealed⁠—pass through those who stood around her bed.</p>
			<p>There she lay looking about her, with something farseeing in her gaze. It was as though she were looking out over Rome, where the people were now thronging up and down the streets and greeting one another with the joyful news.</p>
			<p>She raised her head as high as she could and said: “So am I⁠—I am very happy. God has allowed me to die that he may live. I don’t mind dying when I have made so many people happy.”</p>
			<p>She lay down again, and a few seconds later she was dead.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>But they say in Rome that, after his recovery, the Holy Father entertained himself one day by looking through the church records of pious pledges which had been offered for his recovery.</p>
			<p>Smilingly he read the long lists of little gifts until he came to the record where Concenza Zamponi had presented him with her remaining years of life. Instantly he became very serious and thoughtful.</p>
			<p>He made inquiries about Concenza Zamponi and learned that she had died on the night of his recovery. He then bade them call to him her son, Dominico, and questioned him minutely as to her last moments.</p>
			<p>“My son,” said the Pope to him when he had spoken, “your mother has not saved my life, as she believed in her last hour; but I am deeply moved by her love and self-sacrifice.”</p>
			<p>He let Dominico kiss his hand, whereupon he dismissed him.</p>
			<p>But the Romans assure you that, although the Pope would not admit that his span of years had been lengthened by the poor woman’s gift, he was nevertheless certain of it. “Why else should Father Zamponi have had such a meteoric career?” asked the Romans. “He is already a bishop and it is whispered that he will soon be a Cardinal.”</p>
			<p>And in Rome they never feared after that that the Pope would die, not even when he was mortally ill. They were prepared to have him live longer than other people. His life had of course been lengthened by all the years that poor Concenza had given him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
